

PAULO COELHO
ELEVEN MINUTES

On 29th May 2002, just hours before I put the finishing
touches to this book, I visited the Grotto in Lourdes, in France,
to fill a few bottles with miraculous water from the spring.
Inside the Basilica, a gentleman in his seventies said to me:
“You know, you look just like Paulo Coelho.” I said that I was
Paulo Coelho. The man embraced me and introduced me to his
wife and granddaughter. He spoke of the importance of my
books in his life, concluding: “They make me dream.” I have
often heard these words before, and they always please me
greatly. At that moment, however, I felt really frightened,
because I knew that my new novel, Eleven Minutes, dealt with
a subject that was harsh, difficult, shocking. I went over to the
spring, filled my bottles, then came back and asked him where
he lived (in northern France, near Belgium) and noted down
his name.
This book is dedicated to you, Maurice Gravelines. I have a
duty to you, your wife and granddaughter and to myself to talk
about the things that concern me and not only about what
everyone would like to hear. Some books make us dream,
others bring us face to face with reality, but what matters most
to the author is the honesty with which a book is written.
And, behold, a woman which was in the city, a sinner; and
when she knew that Jesus was sitting at meat in the Pharisee’s
house, she brought an alabaster cruse of ointment.
And standing behind at his feet, weeping, she began to wet
his feet with her tears, and wiped them with the hair of her
head, and kissed his feet, and anointed them with the ointment.
Now when the Pharisee which had bidden him saw it, he
spake within himself, saying, This man, if he were a prophet,
would have perceived who and what manner of woman this is
which toucheth him, that she is a sinner.
And Jesus answering said unto him, Simon, I have
somewhat to say unto thee. And he saith, Master, say on.
A certain lender had two debtors: the one owed five
hundred pence, and the other fifty.
And when they had not wherewith to pay, he forgave them
both. Which of them therefore will love him most?
Simon answered and said, He, I suppose, to whom he
forgave the most. And he said unto him, Thou hast rightly
judged.
And turning to the woman, he said unto Simon, Seest thou
this woman? I entered into thine house, thou gavest me no
water for my feet; but she hath washed my feet with her tears,
and wiped them her hair.
Thou gavest me no kiss: but she, since the time I came in,
hath not ceased to kiss my feet.
My head with oil thou didst not anoint: but this she hath
anointed my feet with ointment.
Wherefore I say unto thee, Her sins, which are many, are
forgiven; for she loved much: but to whom little is forgiven,
the same loveth little.
Luke 7:37-47
EPIGRAPH
For I am the first and the last
I am the venerated and the despised
I am the prostitute and the saint
I am the wife and the virgin
I am the mother and the daughter
I am the arms of my mother
I am barren and my children are many
I am the married woman and the spinster
I am the woman who gives birth and she who never procreated
I am the consolation for the pain of birth
I am the wife and the husband
And it was my man who created me
I am the mother of my father
I am the sister of my husband
And he is my rejected son
Always respect me
For I am the shameful and the magnificent one
Hymn to Isis, third or fourth century B.C., discovered in Nag
Hammadi
CONTENTS
DEDICATION
EPIGRAPH
BEGIN READING
AFTERWORD
P.S. INSIGHTS, INTERVIEWS & MORE…
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
PRAISE
OTHER BOOKS BY PAULO COELHO
CREDITS
COPYRIGHT
ABOUT THE PUBLISHER
BEGIN READING
Once upon a time, there was a prostitute called Maria. Wait a
minute. “Once upon a time” is how all the best children’s
stories begin and “prostitute” is a word for adults. How can I
start a book with this apparent contradiction? But since, at
every moment of our lives, we all have one foot in a fairy tale
and the other in the abyss, let’s keep that beginning.
Once upon a time, there was a prostitute called Maria.
Like all prostitutes, she was born both innocent and a
virgin, and, as an adolescent, she dreamed of meeting the man
of her life (rich, handsome, intelligent), of getting married (in
a wedding dress), having two children (who would grow up to
be famous) and living in a lovely house (with a sea view). Her
father was a travelling salesman, her mother a seamstress, and
her hometown, in the interior of Brazil, had only one cinema,
one nightclub and one bank, which was why Maria was always
hoping that one day, without warning, her Prince Charming
would arrive, sweep her off her feet and take her away with
him so that they could conquer the world together.
While she was waiting for her Prince Charming to appear,
all she could do was dream. She fell in love for the first time
when she was eleven, en route from her house to school. On
the first day of term, she discovered that she was not alone on
her way to school: making the same journey was a boy who
lived in her neighborhood and who shared the same timetable.
They never exchanged a single word, but gradually Maria
became aware that, for her, the best part of the day were those
moments spent going to school: moments of dust, thirst and
weariness, with the sun beating down, the boy walking fast,
and with her trying her hardest to keep up.
This scene was repeated month after month; Maria, who
hated studying and whose only other distraction in life was
television, began to wish that the days would pass quickly; she
waited eagerly for each journey to school and, unlike other
girls her age, she found the weekends deadly dull. Given that
the hours pass more slowly for a child than for an adult, she
suffered greatly and found the days far too long simply
because they allowed her only ten minutes to be with the love
of her life and thousands of hours to spend thinking about him,
imagining how good it would be if they could talk.
Then it happened.
One morning, on the way to school, the boy came up to her
and asked if he could borrow a pencil. Maria didn’t reply; in
fact, she seemed rather irritated by this unexpected approach
and even quickened her step. She had felt petrified when she
saw him coming toward her, terrified that he might realize
how much she loved him, how eagerly she had waited for him,
how she had dreamed of taking his hand, of walking straight
past the school gates with him and continuing along the road
to the end, where—people said—there was a big city, film
stars and television stars, cars, lots of cinemas, and an endless
number of fun things to do.
For the rest of the day, she couldn’t concentrate on her
lessons, tormented by her own absurd behavior, but, at the
same time, relieved, because she knew that the boy had
noticed her too, and that the pencil had just been an excuse to
start a conversation, because when he came over to her, she
had noticed that he already had a pen in his pocket. She waited
for the next time, and during that night—and the nights that
followed—she went over and over what she would say to him,
until she found the right way to begin a story that would never
end.
But there was no next time, for although they continued to
walk to school together, with Maria sometimes a few steps
ahead, clutching a pencil in her right hand, and at other times,
walking slightly behind him so that she could gaze at him
tenderly, he never said another word to her, and she had to
content herself with loving and suffering in silence until the
end of the school year.
During the interminable school holidays that followed, she
woke up one morning to find that she had blood on her legs
and was convinced she was going to die. She decided to leave
a letter for the boy, telling him that he had been the great love
of her life, and then she would go off into the bush and
doubtless be killed by one of the two monsters that terrorized
the country people round about: the werewolf and the mulasem-cabeça (said to be a priest’s mistress transformed into a
mule and doomed to wander the night). That way, her parents
wouldn’t suffer too much over her death, for, although
constantly beset by tragedies, the poor are always hopeful, and
her parents would persuade themselves that she had been
kidnapped by a wealthy, childless family, but would return one
day, rich and famous, while the current (and eternal) love of
her life would never forget her, torturing himself each day for
not having spoken to her again.
She never did write that letter because her mother came
into the room, saw the bloodstained sheets, smiled and said:
“Now you’re a young woman.”
Maria wondered what the connection was between the
blood on her legs and her becoming a young woman, but her
mother wasn’t able to give her a satisfactory explanation: she
just said that it was normal, and that, from now on, for four or
five days a month, she would have to wear something like a
doll’s pillow between her legs. Maria asked if men used some
kind of tube to stop the blood going all over their trousers, and
was told that this was something that only happened to
women.
Maria complained to God, but, in the end, she got used to
menstruating. She could not, however, get used to the boy’s
absence, and kept blaming herself for her own stupidity in
running away from the very thing she most wanted. The day
before the new term began, she went to the only church in
town and vowed to the image of St. Anthony that she would
take the initiative and speak to the boy.
The following day, she put on her smartest dress, one that
her mother had made specially for the occasion, and set off to
school, thanking God that the holidays had finally ended. But
the boy did not appear. And so another agonizing week passed,
until she found out, through some schoolfriends, that he had
left town.
“He’s gone somewhere far away,” someone said.
At that moment, Maria learned that certain things are lost
forever. She learned too that there was a place called
“somewhere far away,” that the world was vast and her own
town very small, and that, in the end, the most interesting
people always leave. She too would like to leave, but she was
still very young. Nevertheless, looking at the dusty streets of
the town where she lived, she decided that one day she would
follow in the boy’s footsteps. On the nine Fridays that
followed, she took communion, as was the custom in her
religion, and asked the Virgin Mary to take her away from
there.
She grieved for a while too and tried vainly to find out
where the boy had gone, but no one knew where his parents
had moved to. It began to seem to Maria that the world was
too large, that love was something very dangerous and that the
Virgin was a saint who inhabited a distant heaven and didn’t
listen to the prayers of children.
Three years passed; she learned geography and mathematics,
she began following the soaps on TV; at school, she read her
first erotic magazine; and she began writing a diary describing
her humdrum life and her desire to experience firsthand the
things they told her about in class—the ocean, snow, men in
turbans, elegant women covered in jewels. But since no one
can live on impossible dreams—especially when their mother
is a seamstress and their father is hardly ever at home—she
soon realized that she needed to take more notice of what was
going on around her. She studied in order to get on in life, at
the same time looking for someone with whom she could
share her dreams of adventure. When she had just turned
fifteen, she fell in love with a boy she had met in a Holy Week
procession.
She did not repeat her childhood mistake: they talked,
became friends and started going to the cinema and to parties
together. She also noticed that, as had happened with the first
boy, she associated love more with the person’s absence than
with their presence: she would miss her boyfriend intensely,
would spend hours imagining what they would talk about
when next they met, and remembering every second they had
spent together, trying to work out what she had done right and
what she had done wrong. She liked to think of herself as an
experienced young woman, who had already allowed one
grand passion to slip from her grasp and who knew the pain
that this caused, and now she was determined to fight with all
her might for this man and for marriage, determined that he
was the man for marriage, children and the house by the sea.
She went to talk to her mother, who said imploringly:
“But you’re still very young, my dear.”
“You got married to my father when you were sixteen.”
Her mother preferred not to explain that this had been
because of an unexpected pregnancy, and so she used the
“things were different then” argument and brought the matter
to a close.
The following day, Maria and her boyfriend went for a
walk in the countryside. They talked a little, and Maria asked
if he wanted to travel, but, instead of answering the question,
he took her in his arms and kissed her.
Her first kiss! How she had dreamed of that moment! And
the landscape was special too—the herons flying, the sunset,
the wild beauty of that semi-arid region, the sound of distant
music. Maria pretended to draw back, but then she embraced
him and repeated what she had seen so often on the cinema, in
magazines and on TV: she rubbed her lips against his with
some violence, moving her head from side to side, halfrhythmic, half-frenzied. Now and then, she felt the boy’s
tongue touch her teeth and thought it felt delicious.
Then suddenly he stopped kissing her and asked:
“Don’t you want to?”
What was she supposed to say? Did she want to? Of course
she did! But a woman shouldn’t expose herself in that way,
especially not to her future husband, otherwise he would spend
the rest of his life suspecting that she might say “yes” that
easily to anything. She decided not to answer.
He kissed her again, this time with rather less enthusiasm.
Again he stopped, red-faced, and Maria knew that something
was very wrong, but she was afraid to ask what it was. She
took his hand, and they walked back to the town together,
talking about other things, as if nothing had happened.
That night—using the occasional difficult word because she
was sure that, one day, everything she had written would be
read by someone else, and because she was convinced that
something very important had happened—she wrote in her
diary:
When we meet someone and fall in love, we have a sense that
the whole universe is on our side. I saw this happen today as
the sun went down. And yet if something goes wrong, there is
nothing left! No herons, no distant music, not even the taste of
his lips. How is it possible for the beauty that was there only
minutes before to vanish so quickly?
Life moves very fast. It rushes us from heaven to hell in a
matter of seconds.
The following day, she talked to her girlfriends. They had all
seen her going out for a walk with her future “betrothed.”
After all, it is not enough just to have a great love in your life,
you must make sure that everyone knows what a desirable
person you are. They were dying to know what had happened,
and Maria, very full of herself, said that the best bit was when
his tongue touched her teeth. One of the other girls laughed.
“Didn’t you open your mouth?”
Suddenly everything became clear—his question, his
disappointment.
“What for?”
“To let him put his tongue inside.”
“What difference does it make?”
“It’s not something you can explain. That’s just how people
kiss.”
There was much giggling, pretend pity and gleeful feelings of
revenge amongst these girls who had never had a boy in love
with them. Maria pretended not to care and she laughed too,
although her soul was weeping. She secretly cursed the films
she had seen in the cinema, from which she had learned to
close her eyes, place her hand on the man’s head and move her
head slightly to right and left, but which had failed to show the
essential, most important thing. She made up the perfect
excuse (I didn’t want to give myself at once, because I wasn’t
sure, but now I realize that you are the love of my life) and
waited for the next opportunity.
She didn’t see him until three days later, at a party in a
local club, and he was holding the hand of a friend of hers, the
one who had asked her about the kiss. She again pretended
that she didn’t care, and survived until the end of the evening
talking with her girlfriends about film stars and about other
local boys, and pretending not to notice her friends’ occasional
pitying looks. When she arrived home, though, she allowed
her universe to crumble; she cried all night, suffered for the
next eight months and concluded that love clearly wasn’t made
for her and that she wasn’t made for love. She considered
becoming a nun and devoting the rest of her life to a kind of
love that didn’t hurt and didn’t leave painful scars on the heart
—love for Jesus. At school, they learned about missionaries
who went to Africa, and she decided that there lay an escape
from her dull existence. She planned to enter a convent, she
learned first aid (according to some teachers, a lot of people
were dying in Africa), worked harder in her religious
knowledge classes, and began to imagine herself as a modernday saint, saving lives and visiting jungles inhabited by lions
and tigers.
However, her fifteenth year brought with it not only the
discovery that you were supposed to kiss with your mouth
open, and that love is, above all, a cause of suffering. She
discovered a third thing: masturbation. It happened almost by
chance, as she was touching her genitals while waiting for her
mother to come home. She used to do this when she was a
child and she liked the feeling, until, one day, her father saw
her and slapped her hard, without explaining why. She never
forgot being hit like that, and she learned that she shouldn’t
touch herself in front of other people; since she couldn’t do it
in the middle of the street and she didn’t have a room of her
own at home, she forgot all about the pleasurable sensation.
Until that afternoon, almost six months after the kiss. Her
mother was late coming home, and she had nothing to do; her
father had just gone out with a friend, and since there was
nothing interesting on the TV, she began examining her own
body, in the hope that she might find some unwanted hair
which could immediately be tweezed out. To her surprise, she
noticed a small gland above her vagina; she began touching it
and found that she couldn’t stop; the feelings provoked were
so strong and so pleasurable, and her whole body—
particularly the part she was touching—became tense. After a
while, she began to enter a kind of paradise, the feelings grew
intensity, until she noticed that she could no longer see or hear
clearly, everything appeared to be tinged with yellow, and then
she moaned with pleasure and had her first orgasm.
Orgasm!
It was like floating up to heaven and then parachuting
slowly down to earth again. Her body was drenched in sweat,
but she felt complete, fulfilled and full of energy. So that was
what sex was! How wonderful! Not like in erotic magazines in
which everyone talked about pleasure, but seemed to be
grimacing in pain. And no need for a man, who liked a
woman’s body, but had no time for her feelings. She could do
it on her own! She did it again, this time imagining that a
famous movie star was touching her, and once more she
floated up to paradise and parachuted down again, feeling
even more energized. Just as she was about to do it for a third
time, her mother came home.
Maria talked to her girlfriends about her new discovery, not
saying that she had only discovered it a few hours before. All
of them—apart from two—knew what she was talking about,
but none of them had ever dared to raise the subject. It was
Maria’s turn to feel like a revolutionary, to be the leader of the
group, inventing an absurd “secret confessions” game, which
involved asking everyone their favorite method of
masturbation. She learned various different techniques, like
lying under the covers in the height of summer (because, one
of her friends assured her, sweating helped), using a goose
feather to touch yourself there (she didn’t yet know what the
place was called), letting a boy do it to you (Maria thought this
unnecessary), using the spray in the bidet (she didn’t have one
at home, but she would try it as soon as she visited one of her
richer friends).
Anyway, once she had discovered masturbation and used a
few of the techniques suggested by her friends, she abandoned
forever the idea of a religious life. Masturbation gave her
enormous pleasure, and yet the Church seemed to imply that
sex was the greatest of sins. She heard various tales from those
same girlfriends: masturbation gave you spots, could lead to
madness or even pregnancy. Nevertheless, despite all these
risks, she continued to pleasure herself at least once a week,
usually on Wednesdays, when her father went out to play cards
with his friends.
At the same time, she grew more and more insecure in her
relationships with boys, and more and more determined to
leave the place where she lived. She fell in love a third time
and a fourth, she knew how to kiss now, and when she was
alone with her boyfriends, she touched them and allowed
herself to be touched, but something always went wrong, and
the relationship would end precisely at the moment when she
was sure that this was the person with whom she wanted to
spend the rest of her life. After a long time, she came to the
conclusion that men brought only pain, frustration, suffering
and a sense of time dragging. One afternoon, watching a
mother playing with her two-year-old son, she decided that she
could still think about a husband, children and a house with a
sea-view, but that she would never fall in love again, because
love spoiled everything.
And so Maria’s adolescent years passed. She grew prettier and
prettier, and her sad, mysterious air brought her many suitors.
She went out with one boy and with another, and she dreamed
and suffered—despite her promise to herself never to fall in
love again. On one such date, she lost her virginity on the back
seat of a car; she and her boyfriend were touching each other
with more than usual ardor, the boy got very worked up, and
she, weary of being the only virgin amongst her group of
friends, allowed him to penetrate her. Unlike masturbation,
which took her up to heaven, this hurt her and caused a trickle
of blood which left a stain on her skirt that took ages to wash
out. There wasn’t the magical sensation of her first kiss—the
herons flying, the sunset, the music…but she would rather not
think about that.
She made love with the same boy a few more times,
although she had to threaten him first, saying that if he didn’t,
she would tell her father he had raped her. She used him as a
way of learning, trying in every way she could to understand
what pleasure there was in having sex with a partner.
She couldn’t understand it; masturbation was much less
trouble and far more rewarding. But all the magazines, the TV
programs, books, girlfriends, everything, ABSOLUTELY
EVERYTHING, said that a man was essential. Maria began to
think that she must have some unspeakable sexual problem, so
she concentrated still more on her studies and, for a while,
forgot about that marvelous, murderous thing called Love.
From Maria’s diary, when she was seventeen:
My aim is to understand love. I know how alive I felt when I
was in love, and I know that everything I have now, however
interesting it might seem, doesn’t really excite me.
But love is a terrible thing: I’ve seen my girlfriends suffer
and I don’t want the same thing to happen to me. They used to
laugh at me and my innocence, but now they ask me how it is I
manage men so well. I smile and say nothing, because I know
that the remedy is worse than the pain: I simply don’t fall in
love. With each day that passes, I see more clearly how fragile
men are, how inconstant, insecure and surprising they are…a
few of my girlfriends’ fathers have propositioned me, but I’ve
always refused. At first, I was shocked, but now I think it’s just
the way men are.
Although my aim is to understand love, and although I
suffer to think of the people to whom I gave my heart, I see
that those who touched my heart failed to arouse my body, and
that those who aroused my body failed to touch my heart.
She turned nineteen, having finished secondary school, and
found a job in a draper’s shop, where her boss promptly fell in
love with her. By then, however, Maria knew how to use a
man, without being used by him. She never let him touch her,
although she was always very coquettish, conscious of the
power of her beauty.
The power of beauty: what must the world be like for ugly
women? She had some girlfriends who no one ever noticed at
parties or who men were never interested in. Incredible though
it might seem, these girls placed far greater value on the little
love they received, suffered in silence when they were rejected
and tried to face the future by looking for other things beyond
getting all dressed up for someone else. They were more
independent, took more interest in themselves, although, in
Maria’s imagination, the world for them must seem
unbearable.
She knew how attractive she was, and although she rarely
listened to her mother, there was one thing her mother said that
she never forgot: “Beauty, my dear, doesn’t last.” With this in
mind, she continued to keep her boss at arm’s length, though
without putting him off completely, and this brought her a
considerable increase in salary (she didn’t know how long she
would be able to string him along with the mere hope of one
day getting her into bed, but at least she was earning good
money meanwhile). He also paid her overtime for working late
(her boss liked having her around, perhaps worried that if she
went out at night, she might find the great love of her life). She
worked for two years solidly, paid money each month to her
parents for her keep, and, at last, she did it! She saved up
enough money to go and spend a week’s holiday in the city of
her dreams, the place where film and TV stars live, the picture
postcard image of her country: Rio de Janeiro!
Her boss offered to go with her and to pay all her expenses,
but Maria lied to him, saying that, since she was going to one
of the most dangerous places in the world, the one condition
her mother had laid down was that she was to stay at the house
of a cousin trained in judo.
“Besides, sir,” she said, “you can’t just leave the shop
without some reliable person to look after it.”
“Don’t call me ‘sir,’” he said, and Maria saw in his eyes
something she recognized: the flame of love. And this
surprised her, because she had always thought he was only
interested in sex; and yet, his eyes were saying the exact
opposite: “I can give you a house, a family, some money for
your parents.” Thinking of the future, she decided to stoke the
fire.
She said that she would really miss the job, as well as the
colleagues she just adored working with (she was careful not
to mention anyone in particular, leaving the mystery hanging
in the air: did “colleague” mean him?) and she promised to
take great care of her purse and her honor. The truth was quite
different: she didn’t want anyone, anyone at all, to spoil what
would be her first week of total freedom. She wanted to do
everything—swim in the sea, talk to complete strangers, look
in shop windows, and be prepared for a Prince Charming to
appear and carry her off for good.
“What’s a week after all?” she said with a seductive smile,
hoping that she was wrong. “It will pass in a flash, and I’ll
soon be back at work.”
Saddened, her boss resisted at first, but finally accepted her
decision, for at the time he was making secret plans to ask her
to marry him as soon as she got back, and he didn’t want to
spoil everything by appearing too pushy.
Maria travelled for forty-eight hours by bus, checked into a
cheap hotel in Copacabana (Copacabana! That beach, that
sky…) and even before she had unpacked her bags, she
grabbed the bikini she had bought, put it on, and despite the
cloudy weather, made straight for the beach. She looked at the
sea fearfully, but ended up wading awkwardly into its waters.
No one on the beach noticed that this was her first contact
with the ocean, with the goddess Iemanjá, the maritime
currents, the foaming waves and, on the other side of the
Atlantic, with the coast of Africa and its lions. When she came
out of the water, she was approached by a woman trying to
selling wholefood sandwiches, by a handsome black man who
asked if she wanted to go out with him that night, and by
another man who didn’t speak a word of Portuguese but who
asked, using gestures, if she would like to have a drink of
coconut water.
Maria bought a sandwich because she was too embarrassed
to say “no,” but she avoided speaking to the two strangers. She
felt suddenly disappointed with herself; now that she had the
chance to do anything she wanted, why was she behaving in
this ridiculous manner? Finding no good explanation, she sat
down to wait for the sun to come out from behind the clouds,
still surprised at her own courage and at how cold the water
was, even in the height of summer.
However, the man who couldn’t speak Portuguese
reappeared at her side bearing a drink, which he offered to her.
Relieved not to have to talk to him, she drank the coconut
water and smiled at him, and he smiled back. For some time,
they kept up this comfortable, meaningless conversation—a
smile here, a smile there—until the man took a small red
dictionary out of his pocket and said, in a strange accent:
“bonita”—“pretty.” She smiled again; however much she
wanted to meet her Prince Charming, he should at least speak
her language and be slightly younger.
The man went on leafing through the little book:
“Supper…tonight?”
Then he said:
“Switzerland!”
And he completed this with words that sound like the bells
of paradise in whatever language they are spoken:
“Work! Dollars!”
Maria did not know any restaurant called Switzerland, and
could things really be that easy and dreams so quickly
fulfilled? She erred on the side of caution: “Thank you very
much for the invitation, but I already have a job and I’m not
interested in buying any dollars.”
The man, who understood not a word she said, was
growing desperate; after many more smiles back and forth, he
left her for a few minutes and returned with an interpreter.
Through him, he explained that he was from Switzerland (the
country, not a restaurant) and that he would like to have supper
with her, in order to talk to her about a possible job offer. The
interpreter, who introduced himself as the person in charge of
foreign tourists and security in the hotel where the man was
staying, added on his own account:
“I’d accept if I were you. He’s an important impresario
looking for new talent to work in Europe. If you like, I can put
you in touch with some other people who accepted his
invitation, got rich and are now married with children who
won’t have to worry about being mugged or unemployed.”
Then, trying to impress her with his grasp of international
culture, he said:
“Besides, Switzerland makes excellent chocolates and
watches.”
Maria’s only stage experience had been in the Passion play
that the local council always put on during Holy Week, and in
which she had had a walk-on part as a waterseller. She had
barely slept on the bus, but she was excited by the sea, tired of
eating sandwiches, wholefood or otherwise, and confused
because she didn’t know anyone and needed to find a friend.
She had been in similar situations before, in which a man
promises everything and gives nothing, so she knew that all
this talk of acting was just a way of getting her interested.
However, convinced that the Virgin had presented her with
this chance, convinced that she must enjoy every second of her
week’s holiday, and because a visit to a good restaurant would
provide her with something to talk about when she went home,
she decided to accept the invitation, as long as the interpreter
came too, for she was already getting tired of smiling and
pretending that she could understand what the foreigner was
saying.
The only problem was also the gravest one: she did not
have anything suitable to wear. A woman never admits to such
things (she would find it easier to admit that her husband had
betrayed her than to reveal the state of her wardrobe), but
since she did not know these people and might well never see
them again, she felt that she had nothing to lose.
“I’ve just arrived from the northeast and I haven’t got the
right clothes to wear to a restaurant.”
Through the interpreter, the man told her not to worry and
asked for the address of her hotel. That evening, she received a
dress the like of which she had never seen in her entire life,
accompanied by a pair of shoes that must have cost as much as
she earned in a year.
She felt that this was the beginning of the road she had so
longed for during her childhood and adolescence in the sertão,
the Brazilian backlands, putting up with the constant droughts,
the boys with no future, the poor but honest town, the dull,
repetitive way of life: she was ready to be transformed into the
princess of the universe! A man had offered her work, dollars,
a pair of exorbitantly expensive shoes and a dress straight out
of a fairy tale! All she lacked was some makeup, but the
receptionist at her hotel took pity on her and helped her out,
first warning her not to assume that every foreigner was
trustworthy or that every man in Rio was a mugger.
Maria ignored the warning, put on her gifts from heaven,
spent hours in front of the mirror, regretting not having
brought a camera with her in order to record the moment, only
to realize that she was late for her date. She raced off, just like
Cinderella, to the hotel where the Swiss gentleman was
staying.
To her surprise, the interpreter told her that he would not be
accompanying them.
“Don’t worry about the language, what matters is whether
or not he feels comfortable with you.”
“But how can he if he doesn’t understand what I’m
saying?”
“Precisely. You don’t need to talk, it’s all a question of
vibes.”
Maria didn’t know what “vibes” were; where she came
from, people needed to exchange words, phrases, questions
and answers whenever they met. But Mailson—the name of
the interpreter-cum-security officer—assured her that in Rio
de Janeiro and the rest of the world, things were different.
“He doesn’t need to understand, just make him feel at ease.
He’s widower with no children; he owns a nightclub and is
looking for Brazilian women who want to work abroad. I said
you weren’t the type, but he insisted, saying that he had fallen
in love with you when he saw you coming out of the water. He
thought your bikini was lovely too.”
He paused.
“But, frankly, if you want to find a boyfriend here, you’ll
have to get a different bikini; no one, apart from this Swiss
guy, will go for it; it’s really old-fashioned.”
Maria pretended that she hadn’t heard. Mailson went on:
“I don’t think he’s interested in just having a bit of a fling;
he reckons you’ve got what it takes to become the main
attraction at his club. Of course, he hasn’t seen you sing or
dance, but you could learn all that, whereas beauty is
something you’re born with. These Europeans are all the
same; they come over here and imagine that all Brazilian
women are really sensual and know how to samba. If he’s
serious, I’d advise you to get a signed contract and have the
signature verified at the Swiss consulate before leaving the
country. I’ll be on the beach tomorrow, opposite the hotel, if
you want to talk to me about anything.”
The Swiss man, all smiles, took her arm and indicated the
taxi awaiting them.
“If he has other intentions, and you have too, then the
normal price is three hundred dollars a night. Don’t accept any
less.”
Before she could say anything, she was on her way to the
restaurant, with the man rehearsing the words he wanted to
say. The conversation was very simple:
“Work? Dollars? Brazilian star?”
Maria, meanwhile, was still thinking about what the
interpreter-cum-security officer had said: three hundred dollars
a night! That was a fortune! She didn’t need to suffer for love,
she could play this man along just as she had her boss at the
shop, get married, have children and give her parents a
comfortable life. What did she have to lose? He was old and
he might die before too long, and then she would be rich—
these Swiss men obviously had too much money and not
enough women back home.
They said little over the meal—just the usual exchange of
smiles—and Maria gradually began to understand what
Mailson had meant by “vibes.” The man showed her an album
containing writing in a language that she did not know; photos
of women in bikinis (doubtless better and more daring than the
one she had worn that afternoon), newspaper cuttings, garish
leaflets in which the only word she recognized was “Brazil,”
wrongly spelled (hadn’t they taught him at school that it was
written with an “s”?). She drank a lot, afraid that the man
would proposition her (after all, even though she had never
done this in her life before, no one could turn their nose up at
three hundred dollars, and things always seem simpler with a
bit of alcohol inside you, especially if you’re among
strangers). But the man behaved like a perfect gentleman, even
holding her chair for her when she sat down and got up. In the
end, she said that she was tired and arranged to meet him on
the beach the following day (pointing to her watch, showing
him the time, making the movement of the waves with her
hands and saying “a-ma-nhã”—“tomorrow”—very slowly).
He seemed pleased and looked at his own watch (possibly
Swiss), and agreed on the time.
She did not go to sleep straight away. She dreamed that it was
all a dream. Then she woke up and saw that it wasn’t: there
was the dress draped over the chair in her modest room, the
beautiful shoes and that rendezvous on the beach.
From Maria’s diary, on the day that she met the Swiss man:
Everything tells me that I am about to make a wrong decision,
but making mistakes is just part of life. What does the world
want of me? Does it want me to take no risks, to go back
where I came from because I didn’t have the courage to say
“yes” to life?
I made my first mistake when I was eleven years old, when
that boy asked me if I could lend him a pencil; since then, I’ve
realized that sometimes you get no second chance and that it’s
best to accept the gifts the world offers you. Of course it’s
risky, but is the risk any greater than the chance of the bus that
took forty-eight hours to bring me here having an accident? If
I must be faithful to someone or something, then I have, first of
all, to be faithful to myself. If I’m looking for true love, I first
have to get the mediocre loves out of my system. The little
experience of life I’ve had has taught me that no one owns
anything, that everything is an illusion—and that applies to
material as well as spiritual things. Anyone who has lost
something they thought was theirs forever (as has happened
often enough to me already) finally comes to realize that
nothing really belongs to them.
And if nothing belongs to me, then there’s no point wasting
my time looking after things that aren’t mine; it’s best to live as
if today were the first (or last) day of my life.
The next day, together with Mailson, the interpreter-cumsecurity officer and now, according to him, her agent, she said
that she would accept the Swiss man’s offer, as long as she had
a document provided by the Swiss consulate. The foreigner,
who seemed accustomed to such demands, said that this was
something he wanted too, since, if she was to work in his
country, she needed a piece of paper proving that no one there
could do the job she was proposing to do—and this was not
particularly difficult, given that Swiss women had no
particular talent for the samba. Together they went to the city
center, and the security officer-cum-interpreter-cum-agent
demanded a cash advance as soon as the contract was signed,
thirty percent of the five hundred dollars she received.
“That’s a week’s payment in advance. One week, you
understand? You’ll be earning five hundred dollars a week
from now on, but with no deductions, because I only get a
commission on the first payment.”
Up until then, travel and the idea of going far away had just
been a dream, and dreaming is very pleasant as long as you are
not forced to put your dreams into practice. That way, we
avoid all the risks, frustrations and difficulties, and when we
are old, we can always blame other people—preferably our
parents, our spouses or our children—for our failure to realize
our dreams.
Suddenly, there was the opportunity she had been so
eagerly awaiting, but which she had hoped would never come!
How could she possibly deal with the challenges and the
dangers of a life she did not know? How could she leave
behind everything she was used to? Why had the Virgin
decided to go this far?
Maria consoled herself with the thought that she could
change her mind at any moment; it was all just a silly game,
something different to tell her friends about when she went
back home. After all, she lived more than a thousand
kilometers from there and she now had three hundred and fifty
dollars in her purse, so if, tomorrow, she decided to pack her
bags and run away, there was no way they would ever be able
to track her down again.
In the afternoon following their visit to the consulate, she
decided to go for a walk on her own by the sea, where she
looked at the children, the volleyball players, the beggars, the
drunks, the sellers of traditional Brazilian artifacts (made in
China), the people jogging and exercising as a way of fending
off old age, the foreign tourists, the mothers with their
children, and the pensioners playing cards at the far end of the
promenade. She had come to Rio de Janeiro, she had been to a
five-star restaurant and to a consulate, she had met a foreigner,
she had an agent, she had been given a present of a dress and a
pair of shoes that no one, absolutely no one, back home could
ever have afforded.
And now what?
She looked out to sea: her geography lessons told her that if
she set off in a straight line, she would reach Africa, with its
lions and jungles full of gorillas. However, if she headed in a
slightly more northerly direction, she would end up in the
enchanted kingdom known as Europe, with its Eiffel Tower,
EuroDisney and Leaning Tower of Pizza. What did she have to
lose? Like every Brazilian girl, she had learned to samba even
before she could say “Mama”; she could always come back if
she didn’t like it, and she had already learned that
opportunities are made to be seized.
She had spent a lot of her life saying “no” to things to
which she would have liked to say “yes,” determined to try
only those experiences she could control—certain affairs she
had had with men, for example. Now she was facing the
unknown, as unknown as this sea had once been to the
navigators who crossed it, or so she had been told in history
classes. She could always say “no,” but would she then spend
the rest of her life brooding over it, as she still did over the
memory of the little boy who had once asked to borrow a
pencil and had then disappeared—her first love? She could
always say “no,” but why not try saying “yes” this time?
For one very simple reason: she was a girl from the
backlands of Brazil, with no experience of life apart from a
good school, a vast knowledge of TV soaps and the certainty
that she was beautiful. That wasn’t enough with which to face
the world.
She saw a group of people laughing and looking at the sea,
afraid to go in. Two days ago, she had felt the same thing, but
now she was no longer afraid; she went into the water
whenever she wanted, as if she had been born there. Wouldn’t
it be the same in Europe?
She made a silent prayer and again asked the Virgin Mary’s
advice, and seconds later, she seemed perfectly at ease with
her decision to go ahead, because she felt protected. She could
always come back, but she would not necessarily get another
chance of a trip like this. It was worth taking the risk, as long
as the dream survived the forty-eight-hour journey back home
in a bus with no air conditioning, and as long as the Swiss man
didn’t change his mind.
She was in such good spirits that when he invited her out to
supper again, she wanted to appear alluring and took his hand
in hers, but he immediately pulled away, and Maria realized—
with a mixture of fear and relief—that he was serious about
what he said.
“Samba star!” said the man. “Lovely Brazilian samba star!
Travel next week!”
This was all well and good, but “travel next week” was out
of the question. Maria explained that she couldn’t take a
decision without first consulting her family. The Swiss man
was furious and showed her a copy of the signed contract, and
for the first time she felt afraid.
“Contract!” he said.
Even though she was determined to go home, she decided
to consult her agent Mailson first; after all, he was being paid
to advise her.
Mailson, however, seemed more concerned with seducing a
German tourist who had just arrived at the hotel and who was
sunbathing topless on the beach, convinced that Brazil was the
most liberal country in the world (having failed to notice that
she was the only woman on the beach with her breasts exposed
and that everyone was eyeing her rather uneasily). It was very
hard to get him to pay attention to what she was saying.
“But what if I change my mind?” insisted Maria.
“I don’t know what’s in the contract, but I suppose he
might have you arrested.”
“He’d never be able to find me!”
“Exactly. So why worry?”
The Swiss man, on the other hand, having spent five
hundred dollars, as well as paying for a pair of shoes, a dress,
two suppers and various fees for the paperwork at the
consulate, was beginning to get worried, and so, since Maria
kept insisting on the need to talk to her family, he decided to
buy two plane tickets and go with her to the place where she
had been born—as long as it could all be resolved in fortyeight hours and they could still travel to Europe the following
week, as agreed. With a smile here and a smile there, she was
beginning to understand that this was all in the documents she
had signed and that, when it came to seductions, feelings and
contracts, one should never play around.
It was a surprise and a source of pride to the small town to see
its lovely daughter Maria arrive accompanied by a foreigner
who wanted to make her a big star in Europe. The whole
neighborhood knew, and her old schoolfriends asked: “How
did it happen?”
“I was just lucky.”
They wanted to know if such things were always happening
in Rio de Janeiro, because they had seen similar scenarios in
TV soaps. Maria would not be pinned down, wanting to place
a high value on her personal experience and thus convince her
friends that she was someone special.
She and the man went to her house where he handed round
leaflets, with Brasil spelled with a “z,” and the contract, while
Maria explained that she had an agent now and intended
following a career as an actress. Her mother, seeing the
diminutive bikinis worn by the girls in the photos that the
foreigner was showing her, immediately gave them back and
preferred to ask no questions; all that mattered was that her
daughter should be happy and rich, or unhappy, but at least
rich.
“What’s his name?”
“Roger.”
“Rogério! I had a cousin called Rogério!”
The man smiled and clapped, and they all realized that he
hadn’t understood a word. Maria’s father said:
“He’s about the same age as me.”
Her mother told him not to interfere with their daughter’s
happiness. Since all seamstresses talk a great deal to their
customers and acquire a great deal of knowledge about
marriage and love, her advice to Maria was this:
“My dear, it’s better to be unhappy with a rich man than
happy with a poor man, and over there you’ll have far more
chance of becoming an unhappy rich woman. Besides, if it
doesn’t work out, you can just get on the bus and come home.”
Maria might be a girl from the backlands, but she was more
intelligent than her mother or her future husband imagined,
and she said, simply to be provocative:
“Mama, there isn’t a bus from Europe to Brazil. Besides, I
want a career as a performer, I’m not looking for marriage.”
Her mother gave her a look of near despair.
“If you can go there, you can always come back. Being a
performer, an actress, is fine for a young woman, but it only
lasts as long as your looks, and they start to fade when you’re
about thirty. So make the most of things now. Find someone
who’s honest and loving, and marry him. Love isn’t that
important. I didn’t love your father at first, but money buys
everything, even true love. And look at your father, he’s not
even rich!”
It was bad advice from a friend, but good advice from a
mother. Forty-eight hours later, Maria was back in Rio, though
not without first having made a visit, alone, to her old place of
work in order to hand in her resignation and to hear the owner
of the shop say:
“Yes, I’d heard that a big French impresario wanted to take
you off to Paris. I can’t stop you going in pursuit of your
happiness, but I want you to know something before you
leave.”
He took a medal on a chain out of his pocket.
“It’s the Miraculous Medal of Our Lady of the Graces. She
has a church in Paris, so go there and pray for her protection.
Look, there are some words engraved around the Virgin.”
Maria read: “Hail Mary conceived without sin, pray for us
who turn to you. Amen.”
“Remember to say those words at least once a day. And…”
He hesitated, but it was getting late.
“…if one day you come back, I’ll be waiting for you. I
missed my chance to tell you something very simple: I love
you. It may be too late now, but I wanted you to know.”
Missed chances. She had learned very early on what that
meant. “I love you,” though, were three words she had often
heard during her twenty-two years, and it seemed to her that
they were now completely devoid of meaning, because they
had never turned into anything serious or deep, never
translated into a lasting relationship. Maria thanked him for his
words, noted them in her memory (one never knows what life
may have in store for us, and it’s always good to know where
the emergency exit is), gave him a chaste kiss on the cheek
and left without so much as a backward glance.
They returned to Rio, and within a day she had her passport
(Brazil had really changed, Roger said, using a few words in
Portuguese and a lot of gestures, which Maria took to mean
“before it used to take ages”). With the help of Mailson, the
security officer-cum-interpreter-cum-agent, any other
important purchases were made (clothes, shoes, makeup,
everything that a woman like her could want). On the eve of
their departure for Europe, they went to a nightclub, and when
Roger saw her dance, he felt pleased with his choice; he was
clearly in the presence of a future great star of Cabaret
Cologny, this lovely dark girl with her pale eyes and hair as
black as the wing of the graúna (the Brazilian bird often
evoked by local authors to describe black hair). The work
permit from the Swiss consulate was ready, so they packed
their bags and, the following day, they were flying to the land
of chocolate, clocks and cheese, with Maria secretly planning
to make this man fall in love with her—after all, he wasn’t old,
ugly or poor. What more could she want?
She arrived feeling exhausted and, while still in the airport, her
heart contracted with fear: she realized that she was
completely dependent on the man at her side—she had no
knowledge of the country, the language or the cold. Roger’s
behavior changed as the hours passed; he no longer made any
attempt to be pleasant, and although he had never tried to kiss
her or to fondle her breasts, the look in his eyes grew more and
more distant. He installed her in a small hotel, introducing her
to another young Brazilian woman, a sad creature called
Vivian, who would be in charge of preparing her for the work.
Vivian looked her coolly up and down, without the least
show of sympathy for someone who had clearly never been
abroad before. Instead of asking her how she was feeling, she
got straight down to business.
“Don’t delude yourself. He flies off to Brazil whenever one
of his dancers gets married, something which seems to be
happening more and more frequently. He knows what you
want, and I assume you do too: you’re probably looking for
one of three things—adventure, money or a husband.”
How did she know? Was everyone looking for the same
thing? Or could Vivian read other people’s thoughts?
“All the girls here are looking for one of those three
things,” Vivian went on, and Maria was convinced that she
really could read her thoughts. “As for adventure, it’s too cold
to do anything and, besides, you won’t earn enough to go off
travelling. And as for money, once the cost of room and board
has been deducted, you’ll have to work for nearly a whole year
just to pay for your flight back home.”
“But…”
“I know, that isn’t what you agreed. But the truth is that,
like everyone else, you forgot to ask. If you had been more
careful, if you had read the contract you signed, you would
know exactly what you were getting yourself into, because the
Swiss don’t lie, they just rely on silence to help them.”
Maria felt the ground shifting beneath her.
“And as for a husband, every time a girl gets married, that
represents a great financial loss for Roger, so we’re forbidden
to talk to the customers. If your interests lie in that direction,
you’ll have to run great risks. This isn’t a pick-up place, like in
Rue de Berne.”
Rue de Berne?
“Men come here with their wives, and the few tourists who
turn up get one whiff of the family atmosphere and go looking
for women elsewhere. I presume you know how to dance;
well, if you can sing as well, your salary will increase, but so
will the other girls’ envy, so I’d suggest that, even if you’re the
best singer in Brazil, forget all about it and don’t even try.
Above all, don’t use the phone. You’ll spend everything you
earn on it, and that won’t be much.”
“He promised me five hundred dollars a week!”
“Oh yeah.”
From Maria’s diary, during her second week in Switzerland:
I went to the nightclub and met the dance director who comes
from somewhere called Morocco, and I had to learn every step
of what he—who has never set foot in Brazil—thinks is the
samba. I didn’t even have time to recover from the long flight,
I had to start smiling and dancing on the very first night.
There are six of us, and not one of us is happy and none of us
knows what we’re doing here. The customers drink and
applaud, blow kisses and privately make obscene gestures, but
that’s as far as it goes.
I got paid yesterday, barely a tenth of what we agreed, the
rest, according to the contract, will be used to pay for my
flight and my stay here. According to Vivian’s calculations,
that will take a year, which means that during that time there’s
no escape.
And what’s the point of escaping anyway? I’ve only just
arrived. I haven’t seen anything yet. What’s so awful about
having to dance seven nights a week? I used to do that for
pleasure, now I do it for money and fame; my legs don’t ache,
the only difficult thing is maintaining that fixed smile.
I can choose either to be a victim of the world or an
adventurer in search of treasure. It’s all a question of how I
view my life.
Maria chose to be an adventurer in search of treasure—she put
aside her feelings, she stopped crying every night, and she
forgot all about the person she used to be; she discovered that
she had enough willpower to pretend that she had just been
born and so had no reason to miss anyone. Feelings could
wait, now what she needed to do was to earn some money, get
to know the country and return home victorious.
Besides, everything around her was very like Brazil in
general and her own small town in particular: the women
spoke Portuguese, complained about men, talked loudly,
moaned about their working hours, turned up late at the club,
defied the boss, thought themselves the most beautiful women
in the world, and told stories about their Prince Charmings,
who were usually living miles away or were married or had no
money and so sponged off them. Contrary to what she had
imagined from the leaflets Roger had brought with him, the
club was exactly as Vivian had said it was: it had a family
atmosphere. The girls—described on their work permits as
“samba dancers”—were not allowed to accept invitations or to
go out with the customers. If they were caught receiving a note
with someone’s telephone number on it, they were suspended
from work for two whole weeks. Maria, who had expected
something livelier and more exciting, gradually allowed
herself to succumb to sadness and boredom.
During the first two weeks, she barely left the boarding
house where she was living, especially when she discovered
that no one spoke her language, even if she said everything
VE-RY SLOW-LY. She was also surprised to learn that, unlike
in her own country, the city in which she was living had two
different names—it was Genève to those who lived there and
Genebra to Brazilians.
Finally, in the long, tedious hours spent in her small, TVless room, she concluded:
(a) she would never find what she was
looking for if she couldn’t express herself. In
order to do that, she needed to learn the local
language.
(b) since all her colleagues were looking for
the same thing, she needed to be different. For
that particular problem, she as yet lacked both a
solution or a method.
From Maria’s diary, four weeks after arriving in
Genève/Genebra:
I’ve already been here an eternity, I don’t speak the language,
I spend all day listening to music on the radio, looking round
my room, thinking about Brazil, longing for work to begin and,
when I’m working, longing to get back to the boarding house.
In other words, I’m living the future not the present.
One day, at some distant future date, I’ll get my ticket
home, and I can go back to Brazil, marry the owner of the
draper’s shop and listen to the malicious comments of those
friends who, never having taken any risks themselves, can only
see other people’s failures. No, I can’t go back like that. I’d
rather throw myself out of the plane as it’s crossing the ocean.
Since you can’t open the windows in the plane (I had never
expected that. What a shame not to be able to breathe in the
pure air!), I will die here. But before I die, I want to fight for
life. If I can walk on my own, I can go wherever I like.
The following day, she enrolled in a French course that was
run in the mornings, and there she met people of all creeds,
beliefs and ages, men wearing brightly colored clothes and lots
of gold bracelets, women who always wore a headscarf,
children who learned more quickly than the grown-ups, when
it should have been the other way around, since grown-ups
have more experience. She felt proud when she found out that
everyone knew about her country—Carnival, the samba,
football, and the most famous person in the world, Pelê. At
first, she wanted to be nice and so tried to correct their
pronunciation (it’s Pelê! Pelê!), but after a while, she gave up,
since they also insisted on calling her Maria, with that mania
foreigners have for changing all foreign names and believing
that they are always right.
In the afternoons, so as to practice the language, she took
her first steps around this city of two names. She discovered
some delicious chocolate, a cheese she had never eaten before,
a huge fountain in the middle of the lake, snow (which no one
back home had ever touched), storks, and restaurants with fireplaces (although she never went inside, just seeing the fire
blazing away gave her a pleasant feeling of well-being). She
was also surprised to find that not all the shop signs advertised
clocks; there were banks too, although she couldn’t quite
understand why there were so many for so few inhabitants,
and why she rarely saw anyone inside them. She decided,
however, not to ask any questions.
After three months of keeping a tight rein on herself at
work, her Brazilian blood—as sensual and sexual as everyone
thinks—made its voice heard; she fell in love with an Arab
who was studying French with her in the same course. The
affair lasted three weeks until, one night, she decided to take
time off and go and visit a mountain on the outskirts of
Geneva; this provoked a summons to Roger’s office as soon as
she arrived at work the following day.
No sooner had she opened the door than she was
summarily dismissed for setting a bad example to the other
girls working there. A hysterical Roger said that, yet again, he
had been let down, that Brazilian women couldn’t be trusted
(oh dear, this mania for making generalizations about
everything). She tried telling him that she had had a very high
fever brought on by the sudden change in climate, but the man
would not be persuaded and even claimed that he would have
to go straight back to Brazil in order to find a replacement, and
that he would have been far better off putting on a show using
Yugoslav music and Yugoslav dancers who were far prettier
and far more reliable.
Maria might be young but she was no fool, especially once
her Arab lover had told her that Swiss employment laws were
very strict and, since the nightclub kept back a large part of her
salary, she could easily allege that she was being used for
slave labor.
She went back to Roger’s office, this time speaking
reasonable French, which now included the word “lawyer.”
She left with a few insults and five thousand dollars in
compensation—a sum of money beyond her wildest dreams—
and all because of that magic word “lawyer.” Now she was
free to spend time with her Arab lover, buy a few presents,
take some photos of the snow, and go back home in triumph.
The first thing she did was telephone her mother’s neighbor to
say that she was happy, had a brilliant career ahead of her and
that there was no need for her family to worry. Then, since she
had to leave the room in the boarding house that Roger had
arranged for her, she had no alternative but to go to her Arab
boyfriend, swear undying love, convert to his religion and
marry him, even if she had to wear one of those strange
headscarves; after all, as everyone knew, all Arabs were
extremely wealthy and that was enough.
The Arab, however, was already far away, possibly in
Arabia, a country Maria had never even heard of, and, deep
down, she gave thanks to the Virgin Mary because she had not
been obliged to betray her religion. She now had a reasonable
grasp of spoken French, enough money for her return ticket, a
work permit as a “samba dancer” and a current visa; so,
knowing that she could always go back and marry her former
boss, she decided to try to earn money with her looks.
In Brazil she had read a book about a shepherd who, in
searching for his treasure, encounters various difficulties, and
these difficulties help him to get what he wants; she was in
exactly the same position. She was aware now that the reason
she had been dismissed was so that she could find her true
destiny, as a model.
She rented a small room (with no television, but she had to
live frugally until she began earning lots of money), and the
following day, started doing the rounds of the agencies. They
all told her that she needed to get some professional photos
taken, but this, after all, was an investment in her career—
dreams don’t come cheap. She spent a large part of her money
on an excellent photographer, who spoke little, but was
extremely demanding: he had a vast selection of clothes in his
studio and she posed for him in various outfits, sober and
extravagant, and even in a bikini of which the only person she
knew in Rio de Janeiro, the security officer-cum-interpretercum-former agent, Mailson, would have been proud. She
asked for several extra copies and sent them off to her family
with a letter saying how happy she was in Switzerland. They
would all think she was rich and the owner of an enviable
wardrobe, and that she had been transformed into her town’s
most illustrious daughter. If all went to plan (and she had read
enough books on “positive thinking” to be convinced that
victory was assured), she would be greeted by a brass band on
her return home and would try to persuade the mayor to have a
square named after her.
Since she had no permanent address, she bought a mobile
phone, the sort that use pre-paid phone cards, and in the days
that followed, she waited for job offers. She ate in Chinese
restaurants (which were the cheapest) and, to pass the time,
she studied furiously.
But time dragged, and the telephone didn’t ring. To her
surprise, no one bothered her when she went for walks by the
lake, apart from a few drug-pushers who always hung around
in the same place, underneath one of the bridges that connect
the lovely old public gardens to the newer part of the city. She
began to doubt her looks, until an ex-colleague, whom she
bumped into by chance in a café, told her that it wasn’t her
fault, it was the fault of the Swiss, who hate to bother anyone,
and of other foreigners, who were all afraid of being arrested
for “sexual harassment”—a concept that made relations
between men and women even more complicated.
From Maria’s diary, one night when she lacked the courage to
go out, to live or to continue waiting for the phone call that
never came:
I spent today outside a funfair. Since I can’t afford to fritter my
money away, I thought it best just to watch other people. I
stood for a long time by the roller coaster, and I noticed that
most people get on it in search of excitement, but that once it
starts, they are terrified and want the cars to stop.
What do they expect? Having chosen adventure, shouldn’t
they be prepared to go the whole way? Or do they think that
the intelligent thing to do would be to avoid the ups and downs
and spend all their time on a carousel, going round and round
on the spot?
At the moment, I’m far too lonely to think about love, but I
have to believe that it will happen, that I will find a job and
that I am here because I chose this fate. The roller coaster is
my life; life is a fast, dizzying game; life is a parachute jump;
it’s taking chances, falling over and getting up again; it’s
mountaineering; it’s wanting to get to the very top of yourself
and to feel angry and dissatisfied when you don’t manage it.
It isn’t easy being far from my family and from the
language in which I can express all my feelings and emotions,
but, from now on, whenever I feel depressed, I will remember
that funfair. If I had fallen asleep and suddenly woken up on a
roller coaster, what would I feel?
Well, I would feel trapped and sick, terrified of every bend,
wanting to get off. However, if I believe that the track is my
destiny and that God is in charge of the machine, then the
nightmare becomes something thrilling. It becomes exactly
what it is, a roller coaster, a safe, reliable toy, which will
eventually stop, but, while the journey lasts, I must look at the
surrounding landscape and whoop with excitement.
Although she was capable of writing very wise thoughts, she
was quite incapable of following her own advice; her periods
of depression became more frequent and the phone still
refused to ring. To distract herself during these empty hours,
and in order to practice her French, she began buying
magazines about celebrities, but realized at once that she was
spending too much money, and so she looked for the nearest
lending library. The woman in charge told her that they didn’t
lend out magazines, but that she could suggest a few books
that would help improve her French.
“I haven’t got time to read books.”
“What do you mean you haven’t got time? What are you
doing?”
“Lots of things: studying French, writing a diary, and…”
“And what?”
She was about to say “waiting for the phone to ring,” but
she thought it best to say nothing.
“My dear, you’re still very young, you’ve got your whole
life ahead of you. Read. Forget everything you’ve been told
about books and just read.”
“I’ve read loads of books.”
Suddenly, Maria remembered what Mailson the security
officer had told her about “vibes.” The librarian before her
seemed a very sweet, sensitive person, someone who might be
able to help her if all else failed. She needed to win her over;
her instinct was telling her that this woman could become her
friend. She quickly changed tack.
“But I’d like to read more. Could you help me choose some
books?”
The woman brought her The Little Prince. She started
leafing through it that same night, saw the drawings on the
first page of what seemed to be a hat, but which, according to
the author, all children would instantly recognize as a snake
with an elephant inside it. “Well, I don’t think I can ever have
been a child, then,” she thought. “To me, it looks more like a
hat.” In the absence of any television to watch, she
accompanied the prince on his journeys, feeling sad whenever
the word “love” appeared, for she had forbidden herself to
think about the subject at the risk of feeling suicidal. However,
apart from the painful, romantic scenes between a prince, a fox
and a rose, the book was really interesting, and she didn’t keep
checking every five minutes that the battery in her mobile
phone was still fully charged (she was terrified of missing her
big chance purely out of carelessness).
Maria became a regular visitor to the library, where she would
chat to the woman, who seemed as lonely as she was, ask her
to suggest more books and discuss life and authors—until her
money had nearly run out. Another two weeks and she would
not even have enough left to buy her ticket back to Brazil.
And, since life always waits for some crisis to occur before
revealing itself at its most brilliant, the phone finally rang.
Three months after discovering the word “lawyer” and after
two months of living on the compensation she had received,
someone from a model agency asked if Senhora Maria was
still at this number. The reply was a cool, long-rehearsed
“yes,” so as not to appear too eager. She learned that an Arab
gentleman, who worked in the fashion industry in his country,
had been very taken by her photos and wanted to invite her to
take part in a fashion show. Maria remembered her recent
disappointments, but also the money that she so desperately
needed.
They arranged to meet in a very chic restaurant. She found
herself with an elegant man, older and more charming than
Roger, who asked her:
“Do you know who painted that picture over there? It’s a
Miró. Have you heard of Joan Miró?”
Maria said nothing, as if she were concentrating on the
food, rather different from that in the Chinese restaurants
where she normally ate. Meanwhile, she made a mental note:
on her next visit to the library, she would have to ask for a
book about Miró.
But the Arab was saying:
“This was the table where Fellini always sat. Do you know
his films at all?”
She said she adored them. The man began asking more
probing questions and Maria, knowing that she would fail the
test, decided to be straight with him:
“I’m not going to spend the evening pretending to you. I
can just about tell the difference between Coca-Cola and
Pepsi, but that’s about it. I thought we came here to discuss a
fashion show.”
He seemed to appreciate her frankness.
“We’ll do that when we have our after-supper drink.”
There was a pause, while they looked at each other, each
trying to imagine what the other was thinking.
“You’re very pretty,” said the man. “If you come up and
have a drink with me in my hotel room, I’ll give you a
thousand francs.”
Maria understood at once. Was it the fault of the model
agency? Was it her fault? Should she have found out more
about the nature of this supper? It wasn’t the agency’s fault, or
hers, or the man’s: this was simply how things worked.
Suddenly she missed her hometown, missed Brazil, missed her
mother’s arms. She remembered Mailson, on the beach, when
he had mentioned a fee of three hundred dollars; at the time,
she had thought it funny, much more than she would have
expected to receive for spending the night with a man.
However, at that moment, she realized that she had no one,
absolutely no one in the world she could talk to; she was alone
in a strange city, a relatively experienced twenty-two-year-old,
but none of her experience could help her to decide what
would be the best response.
“Could you pour me some more wine, please.”
The Arab man filled her glass, and her thoughts travelled
faster than the Little Prince on his travels to all those planets.
She had come in search of adventure, money and possibly a
husband; she had known that she would end up getting
proposals such as this, because she was no innocent and was
used to the ways of men. She still believed in model agencies,
stardom, a rich husband, a family, children, grandchildren,
nice clothes, a triumphant return to the place where she was
born. She dreamed of overcoming all difficulties purely by
dint of her own intelligence, charm and willpower.
But reality had just fallen in on her. To the man’s surprise,
she began to cry. He did not know what to do, caught between
his fear of causing a scandal and his instinctive desire to
protect her. He called the waiter over in order to ask for the
bill, but Maria stopped him.
“No, don’t do that. Pour me some more wine and just let
me cry for a while.”
And Maria thought about the little boy who had asked to
borrow a pencil, about the young man who had kissed her and
how she had kept her mouth closed, about her excitement at
seeing Rio for the first time, about the men who had used her
and given nothing back, about the passions and loves lost
along the way. Despite her apparent freedom, her life consisted
of endless hours spent waiting for a miracle, for true love, for
an adventure with the same romantic ending she had seen in
films and read about in books. A writer once said that it is not
time that changes man, nor knowledge; the only thing that can
change someone’s mind is love. What nonsense! The person
who wrote that clearly knew only one side of the coin.
Love was undoubtedly one of the things capable of
changing a person’s whole life, from one moment to the next.
But there was the other side of the coin, the second thing that
could make a human being take a totally different course from
the one he or she had planned; and that was called despair.
Yes, perhaps love really could transform someone, but despair
did the job more quickly. What should she do? Should she run
back to Brazil, become a teacher of French and marry her
former boss? Should she take a small step forward; after all, it
was only one night, in a city where she knew no one and no
one knew her. Would that one night and that easy money mean
that she would inevitably carry on until she reached a point in
the road where there was no turning back? What was
happening here—a great opportunity or a test set her by the
Virgin Mary?
The Arab was looking around at the paintings by Joan
Miró, at the place where Fellini used to have lunch, at the girl
who took the coats and at the other customers arriving and
leaving.
“Didn’t you realize?”
“More wine, please,” said Maria, still in tears.
She was praying that the waiter would not come over and
realize what was going on, and the waiter, who was watching
it all from a distance, out of the corner of his eye, was praying
that the man and the girl would hurry up and pay the bill,
because the restaurant was full and there were people waiting.
At last, after what seemed an eternity, she spoke:
“Did you say a thousand francs for one drink?”
Maria was surprised by her own tone of voice.
“Yes,” said the man, regretting having suggested it in the
first place. “But I really wouldn’t want…”
“Pay the bill and let’s go and have that drink at your hotel.”
Again, she seemed like a stranger to herself. Up until then,
she had been a nice, cheerful, well-brought-up girl, and she
would never have spoken like that to a stranger. But that girl, it
seemed to her, had died forever: before her lay another
existence, in which drinks cost one thousand francs or, to use a
more universal currency, about six hundred dollars.
And everything happened as expected: she went to the Arab’s
hotel, drank champagne, got herself almost completely drunk,
opened her legs, waited for him to have an orgasm (it didn’t
even occur to her to pretend to have one too), washed herself
in the marble bathroom, picked up the money, and allowed
herself the luxury of a taxi home.
She fell into bed and slept dreamlessly all night.
From Maria’s diary, the next day:
I remember everything, although not the moment when I made
the decision. Oddly enough, I have no sense of guilt. I used to
think of girls who went to bed with men for money as people
who had no other choice, and now I see that it isn’t like that. I
could have said “yes” or “no”; no one was forcing me to
accept anything.
I walk about the streets and look at all the people, and I
wonder if they chose their lives? Or were they, like me,
“chosen” by fate? The housewife who dreamed of becoming a
model, the banker who wanted to be a musician, the dentist
who felt he should write a book and devote himself to
literature, the girl who would have loved to be a TV star, but
who found herself instead working at the checkout in a
supermarket.
I don’t feel in the least bit sorry for myself. I am still not a
victim, because I could have left that restaurant with my
dignity intact and my purse empty. I could have given that man
sitting opposite me a lesson in morality or tried to make him
see that before him sat a princess who should be wooed not
bought. I could have responded in all kinds of ways, but—like
most people—I let fate choose which route I should take.
I’m not the only one, even though my fate may put me
outside the law and outside society. In the search for
happiness, however, we are all equal: none of us is happy—not
the banker/musician, the dentist/writer, the checkout
girl/actress, or the housewife/model.
So that was how it worked. As easy as that. There she was in a
strange city where she knew no one, but what had been a
torment to her yesterday, today gave her a tremendous sense of
freedom, because she didn’t need to explain herself to anyone.
She decided that, for the first time in many years, she
would devote the entire day to thinking about herself. Up until
then, she had always been preoccupied with what other people
were thinking: her mother, her schoolfriends, her father, the
people at the model agencies, the French teacher, the waiter,
the librarian, complete strangers in the street. In fact, no one
was thinking anything, certainly not about her, a poor
foreigner, who, if she disappeared tomorrow, wouldn’t even be
missed by the police.
Fine. She went out early, had breakfast in her usual café,
went for a stroll around the lake and saw a demonstration held
by refugees. A woman out walking a small dog told her that
they were Kurds, and Maria, instead of pretending that she
knew the answer in order to prove that she was more
cultivated and intelligent than people might think, asked:
“Where do Kurds come from?”
To her surprise, the woman didn’t know. That’s what the
world is like: people talk as if they knew everything, but if you
dare to ask a question, they don’t know anything. She went
into an Internet café and discovered that the Kurds came from
Kurdistan, a nonexistent country, now divided between Turkey
and Iraq. She went back to the lake in search of the woman
and her dog, but she had gone, possibly because the dog had
got fed up after half an hour of staring at a group of human
beings with banners, headscarves, music and strange cries.
“I’m just like that woman really. Or rather, that’s what I
used to be like: someone pretending to know everything,
hidden away in my own silence, until that Arab guy got on my
nerves, and I finally had the courage to say that the only thing
I knew was how to tell the difference between two soft drinks.
Was he shocked? Did he change his mind about me? Of course
not. He must have been amazed at my honesty. Whenever I try
to appear more intelligent than I am, I always lose out. Well,
enough is enough!”
She thought of the model agency. Did they know what the
Arab guy really wanted—in which case she had, yet again,
been taken for a fool—or had they genuinely thought he was
going to find work for her in his country?
Whatever the truth of the matter, Maria felt less alone on
that gray morning in Geneva, with the temperature close to
zero, the Kurds demonstrating, the trams arriving punctually at
each stop, the shops setting out their jewelry in the windows
again, the banks opening, the beggars sleeping, the Swiss
going to work. She was less alone because by her side was
another woman, invisible perhaps to passersby. She had never
noticed her presence before, but there she was.
She smiled at the invisible woman beside her who looked
like the Virgin Mary, Jesus’s mother. The woman smiled back
and told her to be careful, things were not as simple as she
imagined. Maria ignored the advice and replied that she was a
grown-up, responsible for her own decisions, and she couldn’t
believe that there was some cosmic conspiracy being hatched
against her. She had learned that there were people prepared to
pay one thousand Swiss francs for one night, for half an hour
between her legs, and all she had to decide over the next few
days was whether to take her thousand Swiss francs and buy a
plane ticket back to the town where she had been born, or to
stay a little longer, and earn enough to be able to buy her
parents a house, some lovely clothes for herself and tickets to
all the places she had dreamed of visiting one day.
The invisible woman at her side said again that things
weren’t that simple, but Maria, although glad of this
unexpected company, asked her not to interrupt her thoughts,
because she needed to make some important decisions.
She began to analyze, more carefully this time, the
possibility of going back to Brazil. Her schoolfriends, who had
never left the town they were born in, would all say that she
had been fired from the job, that she had never had the talent
to be an international star. Her mother would be sad never to
have received her promised monthly sum of money, although
Maria, in her letters, had assured her that the post office must
be stealing it. Her father would, forever after, look at her with
that “I told you so” expression on his face; she would go back
to working in the shop, selling fabrics, and she would marry
the owner—she who had travelled in a plane, eaten Swiss
cheese, learned French and walked in the snow.
On the other hand, there were those drinks that had earned
her one thousand Swiss francs. It might not last very long—
after all, beauty changes as swiftly as the wind—but in a year,
she could earn enough money to get back on her feet and
return to the world, this time on her own terms. The only real
problem was that she didn’t know what to do, how to start.
She remembered from her days at the “family nightclub”
where she had first worked that a girl had mentioned
somewhere called Rue de Berne—in fact, it had been one of
the first things she had said, even before she had shown her
where to put her suitcases.
She went over to one of the large panels that can be found
everywhere in Geneva, that most tourist-friendly of cities,
which cannot bear to see tourists getting lost. For this reason
the panels have advertisements on one side and maps on the
other.
A man was standing there, and she asked him if he knew
where Rue de Berne was. He looked at her, intrigued, and
asked if it was the street she was looking for or the road that
went to Berne, the capital of Switzerland. No, said Maria, I
want the street in Geneva. The man looked her up and down,
then walked off without a word, convinced that he was being
filmed by one of those TV programs that delight in making
fools of people. Maria studied the map for fifteen minutes—
it’s not a very big city—and finally found the place she was
looking for.
Her invisible friend, who had remained silent while she
was studying the map, was now trying to reason with her; it
wasn’t a question of morality, but of setting off down a road of
no return.
Maria said that if she could earn enough money to go back
home, then she could earn enough to get out of any situation.
Besides, none of the people she passed had actually chosen
what they wanted to do. That was just a fact of life.
“We live in a vale of tears,” she said to her invisible friend.
“We can have all the dreams we like, but life is hard,
implacable, sad. What are you trying to say: that people will
condemn me? No one will ever know—this is just one phase
of my life.”
With a sad, sweet smile, the invisible friend disappeared.
Maria went to the funfair and bought a ticket for the roller
coaster; she screamed along with everyone else, knowing that
there was no real danger and that it was all just a game. She
ate in a Japanese restaurant, even though she didn’t understand
quite what she was eating, knowing only that it was very
expensive and feeling in a mood to indulge herself in every
luxury. She was happy, she didn’t need to wait for a phone call
now or to watch every centime she spent.
Later that day, she left a message with the agency to thank
them and to tell them that the meeting had gone well. If they
were genuine, they would ask about the photos. If they were
procurers of women, they would arrange more meetings.
She walked across the bridge back to her little room and
decided that, however much money and however many future
plans she had, she would definitely not buy a television: she
needed to think, to use all her time for thinking.
From Maria’s diary that night (with a note in the margin
saying: “Not sure”):
I have discovered the reason why a man pays for a woman: he
wants to be happy.
He wouldn’t pay a thousand francs just to have an orgasm.
He wants to be happy. I do too, everyone does, and yet no one
is. What have I got to lose if, for a while, I decide to become
a…it’s a difficult word to think or even write…but let’s be
blunt…what have I got to lose if I decide to become a
prostitute for a while?
Honor. Dignity. Self-respect. Although, when I think about
it, I’ve never had any of those things. I didn’t ask to be born,
I’ve never found anyone to love me, I’ve always made the
wrong decisions—now I’m letting life decide for me.
The agency phoned the next day and asked about the photos
and when the fashion show was being held, since they got a
percentage of every job. Maria, realizing that they knew
nothing about what had happened, told them that the Arab
gentleman would be in touch with them.
She went to the library and asked for some books about
sex. If she was seriously considering the possibility of working
—just for a year, she had told herself—in an area about which
she knew nothing, the first thing she needed to know was how
to behave, how to give pleasure and receive money in return.
She was most disappointed when the librarian told her that,
since the library was a government-funded institution, they
only had a few technical works. Maria read the index of one of
these books and immediately returned it: they said nothing
about happiness, they talked only about dull things such as
erection, penetration, impotence, precautions…. She did for a
moment consider borrowing The Psychology of Frigidity in
Women, since, in her own case, although she very much
enjoyed being possessed and penetrated by a man, she only
ever reached orgasm through masturbation.
She wasn’t there in search of pleasure, however, but work.
She thanked the librarian, and went to a shop where she made
her first investment in that possible career looming on the
horizon—clothes which she considered to be sexy enough to
arouse men’s desire. Then she went straight to the place she
had found on the map. Rue de Berne. At the top of the street
was a church (oddly enough, very near the Japanese restaurant
where she had had supper the night before), then some shops
selling cheap watches and clocks, and, at the far end, were the
clubs she had heard about, all of them closed at that hour of
the day. She went for another walk around the lake, then—
without a tremor of embarrassment—bought five pornographic
magazines in order to study the kind of thing she would have
to do, waited for darkness to fall and then went back to Rue de
Berne. There she chose at random a bar with the alluringly
Brazilian name of “Copacabana.”
She hadn’t decided anything, she told herself. It was just an
experiment. She hadn’t felt so well or so free in all the time
she had been in Switzerland.
“I’m looking for work,” she told the owner, who was washing
glasses behind the bar. The place consisted of a series of
tables, a few sofas around the walls and, in one corner, a kind
of dance floor. “Nothing doing. If you want to work here
legally you have to have a work permit.”
Maria showed him hers and the man’s mood seemed to
improve.
“Got any experience?”
She didn’t know what to say: if she said yes, he would ask
her where she had worked before. If she said no, he might turn
her down.
“I’m writing a book.”
The idea had come out of nowhere, as if an invisible voice
had come to her aid. She saw that the man knew she was lying,
but was pretending to believe her.
“Before you make any decision, talk to some of the other
girls. We get at least six Brazilian women in every night, that
way you can find out exactly what to expect.”
Maria was about to say that she didn’t need any advice
from anyone and that, besides, she hadn’t come to a decision
just yet, but the man had already moved off to the other side of
the bar, leaving her on her own, without even a glass of water
to drink.
The women started to arrive, and the owner called over
some of the Brazilians and asked them to talk to the new
arrival. None of them seemed very willing; fear of
competition, Maria assumed. The sound system was turned on
and a few Brazilian songs were played (well, the place was
called “Copacabana”); then some Asiatic-looking women
came in, along with others who seemed to have come straight
from the snowy, romantic mountains around Geneva. She had
been standing there for nearly two hours, with nothing to drink
and just a few cigarettes, filled by a growing sense that she
was definitely making the wrong decision—the words “what
am I doing here?” kept repeating over and over in her head—
and feeling increasingly irritated by the complete lack of
interest on the part of both the owner and the other women,
when, finally, one of the Brazilian girls came over to her.
“What made you choose this place?”
Maria could have resorted to that story about writing a
book, or she could, as she had with the Kurds, with Miró and
with Fellini, simply tell the truth.
“To be perfectly honest, I don’t know where to start or if I
want to start.”
The other woman seemed surprised by such a frank, direct
answer. She took a sip of what looked like whisky, listened to
the Brazilian song they were playing, made some comment
about missing her home, then said that there wouldn’t be many
customers that night because a big international conference
being held near Geneva had been cancelled. In the end, when
she saw that Maria still hadn’t left, she said:
“Look, it’s very simple, you just have to stick to three basic
rules. First: never fall in love with anyone you work with or
have sex with. Second: don’t believe any promises and always
get paid up front. Third: don’t use drugs.”
There was a pause.
“And start now. If you go home tonight without having got
your first client, you’ll have second thoughts about it and you
won’t have the courage to come back.”
Maria had gone there more for a consultation, to get some
feedback on her chances of finding a temporary job. She found
herself confronted by the feeling that so often pushes people
into making hasty decisions—despair.
“All right. I’ll start tonight.”
She didn’t mention that she had, in fact, started yesterday.
The woman went up to the owner, whom she called Milan, and
he came over to talk to Maria.
“Have you got nice underwear on?”
No one—her boyfriends, the Arab, her girlfriends, far less a
stranger—had ever asked her that question. But that was what
life was like in that place: straight to the point.
“I’m wearing pale blue panties. And no bra,” she added
provocatively. But all she got was a reprimand.
“Tomorrow, wear black panties, bra and stockings. Taking
off your clothes is all part of the ritual.”
Without more ado, and on the assumption now that he was
talking to someone who was about to start work, Milan
introduced her to the rest of the ritual: the Copacabana should
be a pleasant place to spend time, not a brothel. The men came
into that bar wanting to believe that they would find a lady on
her own. If anyone came over to her table and wasn’t
intercepted en route (because some clients were “exclusive to
certain girls”), he would probably say:
“Would you like a drink?”
To which Maria could say yes or no. She was free to
choose the company she kept, although it wasn’t advisable to
say “no” more than once a night. If she answered in the
affirmative, she should ask for a fruit juice cocktail, which just
happened to be the most expensive drink on the drinks list.
Absolutely no alcohol or letting the customer choose for her.
Then, she should accept any invitation to dance. Most of
the clientele were familiar faces and, apart from the “special
clients,” about whom he did not go into any further detail,
none of them represented any danger. The police and the
Department of Health demanded monthly blood samples, to
check that they weren’t carrying any sexually transmitted
diseases. The use of condoms was obligatory, although there
was no way of checking if this rule was or wasn’t being
followed. She should never, on any account, cause any kind of
scandal—Milan was a respectable married man, concerned for
his reputation and the good name of his club.
He continued explaining the ritual: after dancing, they
would return to the table, and the customer, as if he were
saying something highly original, would invite her to go back
to his hotel with him. The normal price was three hundred and
fifty francs, of which fifty francs went to Milan, for the hire of
the table (a trick to avoid any future legal complications and
accusations of exploiting sex for financial gain).
Maria tried to say:
“But I earned a thousand francs for…”
The owner made as if to move off, but the other Brazilian
woman, who was listening in to the conversation, said:
“She’s just joking.”
And turning to Maria, she said in clear, loud Portuguese:
“This is the most expensive place in Geneva. Never do that
again. He knows what the going rate is and he knows that no
one pays a thousand francs to go to bed with anyone, except,
of course, the ‘special clients,’ but only if you get lucky and
you have the right qualifications.”
Milan’s eyes—later, Maria found out that he was a
Yugoslav who had been living there for twenty years—left no
room for doubt.
“The price is three hundred and fifty francs.”
“Right,” said a humbled Maria.
First, he had asked about the color of her underwear, now
he was deciding how much her body was worth.
But she had no time to think, the man was still issuing
instructions: she must never accept invitations to anyone’s
house or to a hotel that had less than five stars. If the client had
nowhere to take her, she was to go to a hotel located five
blocks from there, and should always take a taxi so that the
women who worked in the other clubs in Rue de Berne didn’t
get to know her face. Maria didn’t believe this last reason; she
thought that the real reason was that she might get an offer of
better working conditions in another club. She kept her
thoughts to herself, however; arguing about the price was bad
enough.
“I’ll say this again: just like policemen in the movies, never
drink while on duty. I’ll leave you now, it’ll start getting busy
soon.”
“Say thank you,” said the other Brazilian woman in
Portuguese.
Maria thanked him. The man smiled, but he had not yet
finished his list of recommendations:
“I forgot something: the time between ordering a drink and
leaving the club should never, under any circumstances,
exceed forty-five minutes—and in Switzerland, with clocks all
over the place, even Yugoslavs and Brazilians must learn to be
punctual. Just remember, I’m feeding my children on your
commission.”
She would remember.
He gave her a glass of sparkling mineral water with a slice of
lemon in it—a drink that could easily pass for a gin and tonic
—and asked her to wait. Gradually the club began to fill up;
men came in, looked around, sat down on their own, and
immediately one of the women would go over to them, as if
they were at a party where everyone has known each other for
ages and as if they were just taking time out to have a little fun
after a hard day at work. Every time a man found a partner,
Maria gave a sigh of relief, even though she was now feeling
much more comfortable. Perhaps it was because it was
Switzerland, perhaps it was because, sooner or later, she would
find adventure, money or a husband, as she had always
dreamed she would. Perhaps—she suddenly realized—it was
because it was the first time in many weeks that she had been
out at night and to a place where there was music playing and
where she could, now and then, hear someone speaking
Portuguese. She was having fun with the other girls around
her, laughing, drinking fruit juice cocktails, talking brightly.
None of them had come up to her to say hello or to wish
her success in her new profession, but that was perfectly
normal; after all, she was a rival, a competitor, competing for
the same trophy. Instead of feeling depressed, she felt proud—
she was fighting for herself, she wasn’t some helpless person.
She could, if she wanted to, open the door and leave that place
for good, but she would always know that she had at least had
the courage to come that far, to negotiate and discuss things
about which she had never in her life even dared to think. She
wasn’t a victim of fate, she kept telling herself: she was
running her own risks, pushing beyond her own limits,
experiencing things which, one day, in the silence of her heart,
in the tedium of old age, she would remember almost with
nostalgia—however absurd that might seem.
She was sure that no one would approach her, and
tomorrow it would all seem like some mad dream that she
would never dare to repeat, for she had just realized that being
paid a thousand francs for one night only happens once;
perhaps she would be better off buying a plane ticket back to
Brazil. To make the time pass more quickly, she began to work
out how much each of the other girls would earn: if they went
out three times a night, they would earn, for every four hours
of work, the equivalent of what it would have taken her two
months to earn at the shop.
Was that a lot? She had earned a thousand francs for one
night, but perhaps that had just been beginner’s luck. At any
rate, an ordinary prostitute could earn more, much more than
she would ever earn teaching French back home. And all they
had to do was spend some time in a bar, dance, spread their
legs and that was that. They didn’t even have to talk.
Money was one motivation, she thought, but was that all?
Or did the people there, the customers and the women, also
enjoy themselves in some way? Was the world so very
different from what she had been taught in school? If you used
a condom, there was no risk. Nor was there any risk of being
recognized by anyone; the only people who visit Geneva—she
had been told once in her French class—were people who
liked going to banks. The majority of Brazilians, however,
enjoy shopping, preferably in Miami or in Paris.
Three hundred Swiss francs a day, five days a week. A
fortune! Why did those women keep working there when they
could earn enough in a month to go back home and buy a new
house for their mother? Or had they only been working there a
short time?
Or—and Maria felt afraid of her own question—did they
enjoy it?
Again she wished she could have a proper drink—the
champagne had helped a lot the previous night.
“Would you like a drink?”
Before her stood a man in his thirties, wearing the uniform
of some airline.
The world went into slow motion, and Maria had a sense of
stepping out of her own body and observing herself from the
outside. Deeply embarrassed, but struggling to control her
blushes, she nodded and smiled, knowing that from that
moment on her life had changed forever.
A fruit juice cocktail, a bit of talk, what are you doing here,
it’s cold, isn’t it? I like this music, oh, I prefer Abba myself,
the Swiss are a chilly lot, are you from Brazil? Tell me about
your country. Well, there’s Carnival. You Brazilian women are
really pretty, you know.
Smile and accept the compliment, perhaps with a slightly
shy look. Back to the dance floor, but all the time keeping an
eye on Milan, who sometimes scratches his head and taps his
wristwatch. The smell of the man’s cologne; she realizes
quickly that she will have to get used to all kinds of smells. At
least this is perfume. They dance very close. Another fruit
juice cocktail, time is passing, didn’t Milan say forty-five
minutes maximum? She looks at her watch, he asks if she’s
expecting someone, she says a few friends of hers will be
arriving in about an hour, he invites her back to his hotel.
Hotel room, three hundred and fifty francs, a shower after sex
(intrigued, the man remarked that no one had ever done that
before). It’s not Maria, it’s some other person who’s inside her
body, who feels nothing, who mechanically goes through the
motions of a ritual. She’s an actress. Milan has taught her
everything, even how to say goodbye to the client, she thanks
him, he too feels awkward and sleepy.
She doesn’t want to go back to the club, she wants to go
home, but she has to go back to hand over the fifty francs, and
then there’s another man, another cocktail, more questions
about Brazil, a hotel, another shower (this time, no comment),
back to the bar where the owner takes his commission and tells
her she can go, there aren’t many customers tonight. She
doesn’t get a taxi, she walks the length of Rue de Berne,
looking at the other clubs, at the shop windows full of clocks
and watches, at the church on the corner (closed, always
closed…) As usual, no one looks at her.
She walks through the cold. She isn’t aware of the freezing
temperatures, she doesn’t cry, she doesn’t think about the
money she has earned, she is in a kind of trance. Some people
were born to face life alone, and this is neither good nor bad, it
is simply life. Maria is one of those people.
She begins to try and think about what has happened: she
only started work today and yet she already considers herself a
professional; it’s as if she started ages ago, as if she had done
this all her life. She experiences a strange sense of pride; she is
glad she didn’t run away. Now she just has to decide whether
or not to carry on. If she does carry on, then she will make
sure she is the best, something she has never been before.
But life was teaching her—very fast—that only the strong
survive. To be strong, she must be the best, there’s no
alternative.
From Maria’s diary a week later:
I’m not a body with a soul, I’m a soul that has a visible part
called the body. All this week, contrary to what one might
expect, I have been more conscious of the presence of this soul
than usual. It didn’t say anything to me, didn’t criticize me or
feel sorry for me: it merely watched me.
Today, I realized why this was happening: it’s been such a
long time since I thought about love or anything called love. It
seems to be running away from me, as if it wasn’t important
any more and didn’t feel welcome. But if I don’t think about
love, I will be nothing.
When I went back to the Copacabana the second night, I
was treated with much more respect—apparently, a lot of girls
do it for one night, but can’t bear to go on. Anyone who does,
becomes a kind of ally, a colleague, because she can
understand the difficulties and the reasons or, rather, the
absence of reasons for having chosen this kind of life.
They all dream of someone who will come along and see in
them a real woman—companion, lover, friend. But they all
know, from the very first moment of each new encounter, that
this simply isn’t going to happen.
I need to write about love. I need to think and think and
write and write about love—otherwise, my soul won’t survive.
However important Maria thought love was, she did not forget
the advice she was given on her first night and did her best to
confine love to the pages of her diary. Apart from that, she
tried desperately to be the best, to earn a lot of money in as
short a time as possible, to think very little and to find a good
reason for doing what she was doing.
That was the most difficult part: what was the real reason?
She was doing it because she needed to. This wasn’t quite
true—everyone needs to earn money, but not everyone
chooses to live on the margins of society. She was doing it
because she wanted to experience something new. No, that
wasn’t true either; the world was full of new experiences—like
skiing or going sailing on Lake Geneva, for example—but she
had never been interested. She was doing it because she had
nothing to lose, because her life was one of constant, day-today frustration.
No, none of these answers was true, so it was best to forget
all about it and simply deal with whatever lay along her
particular path. She had a lot in common with the other
prostitutes, and with all the other women she had known in her
life, whose greatest dream was to get married and have a
secure life. Those who didn’t think like this either had a
husband (almost a third of her colleagues were married) or
were recently divorced. Because of that, and in order to
understand herself, she tried—as tactfully as possible—to
understand why her colleagues had chosen this profession.
She heard nothing new, but she made a list of their
responses. They said they had to help out their husband
(Wasn’t he jealous? What if one of her husband’s friends came
to the club one night? But Maria didn’t dare to ask these
questions), that they wanted to buy a house for their mother
(her own excuse, apparently so noble, and the most common
one), to earn enough money for their fare home (Colombians,
Thais, Peruvians, Brazilians all loved this reason, even though
they had earned enough money several times over and had
immediately spent it, afraid to realize their dream), to have fun
(this didn’t really tally with the atmosphere in the club, and
always rang false), they couldn’t find any other kind of work
(this wasn’t a good reason either, Switzerland was full of jobs
for cleaners, drivers and cooks).
None of them came up with any valid reason, and so she
stopped trying to explain her particular Universe.
She saw that the owner, Milan, was quite right: no one ever
again offered her a thousand Swiss francs for the privilege of
spending a few hours with her. On the other hand, no one ever
complained when she asked for three hundred and fifty francs,
as if they already knew or only asked in order to humiliate her,
or wanted to avoid any unpleasant surprises.
One of the girls said:
“Prostitution isn’t like other businesses: beginners earn
more and the more experienced earn less. Always pretend
you’re a beginner.”
Maria still didn’t know who the “special clients” were; they
had only been mentioned on the first night and no one ever
spoke of them. Gradually, she picked up the most important
tricks of the trade, like never asking personal questions,
smiling a lot and talking as little as possible, never arranging
to meet anyone outside the club. The most important piece of
advice, however, came from a Filipino woman called Nyah:
“When your client comes, you must always groan as if you
were having an orgasm too. That guarantees customer loyalty.”
“But why? They’re just paying for their own satisfaction.”
“No, that’s where you’re wrong. A man doesn’t prove he’s
a man by getting an erection. He’s only a real man if he can
pleasure a woman. And if he can pleasure a prostitute, he’ll
think he’s the best lover on the block.”
And so six months passed: Maria learned all the necessary
lessons, for example, how the Copacabana worked. Since it
was one of the most expensive places on Rue de Berne, the
clientele was largely made up of executives, who had
permission to get home late because they were out “having
supper with clients,” but these “suppers” could never last
longer than eleven o’clock at night. Most of the prostitutes
who worked there were aged between eighteen and twentytwo and they stayed, on average, for two years, when they
would be replaced by newer recruits. They then moved to the
Néon, then to the Xenium, and the price went down as the
woman’s age went up, and the hours of work grew fewer and
fewer. They almost all ended up in the Tropical Extasy, who
accepted women over thirty; but once they were there, they
could only just earn enough to pay for their lunch and their
rent by going with one or two students a day (the average fee
per client was just about enough to buy a bottle of cheap
wine).
She went to bed with many men. She didn’t care how old
they were or how they were dressed, but whether she said yes
or no depended on how they smelled. She had nothing against
cigarettes, but she hated cheap aftershave or those who didn’t
wash or whose clothes stank of booze. The Copacabana was a
quiet place, and Switzerland was possibly the best country in
the world in which to work as a prostitute, as long as you had a
residence permit and a work permit, kept all your papers in
order and paid your social security; Milan was always saying
that he didn’t want his children to see his name in the tabloid
newspapers, and so he was as strict as a policeman when it
came to keeping an eye on his “employees.”
Once you had got past the barrier of the first or second
night, it was a profession much like any other, in which you
worked hard, fought off the competition, tried to maintain
standards, put in the necessary hours, got a bit stressed out,
complained about your workload, and rested on Sundays.
Most of the prostitutes had some kind of religious faith, and
attended their respective churches and masses, said their
prayers and had their encounters with God.
Maria, however, was struggling in the pages of her diary
not to lose her soul. She discovered, to her surprise, that one in
every five clients didn’t want her in order to have sex, but
simply to talk a little. They paid for the bar tab and the hotel
room, and when the moment came for them both to take off
their clothes, the man would say, no, that won’t be necessary.
They wanted to talk about the pressures of work, about their
unfaithful wife, about how lonely they felt, how they had no
one to talk to (something she knew about all too well).
At first, she found this very odd. Then, one night, she went
to the hotel with an arrogant Frenchman, a headhunter for top
executive jobs (he told her this as if he were telling her the
most fascinating thing in the world), and this is what he said:
“Do you know who the loneliest person in the world is?
The executive with a successful career, earning an enormous
salary, trusted by those above and below him, with a family to
go on holiday with and children whom he helps out with their
homework, but who is then approached by someone like me
and asked the following question: ‘How would you like to
change your job and earn twice as much?’”
“The executive, who has every reason to feel wanted and
happy, becomes the most miserable creature on the planet.
Why? Because he has no one to talk to. He is tempted to
accept my offer, but he can’t talk about it to his work
colleagues because they would do everything they could to
persuade him to stay. He can’t talk about it to his wife, who
has been his companion in his rise up the ladder of success and
understands a great deal about security, but nothing about
taking risks. He can’t talk to anyone about it and there he is
confronted by the biggest decision of his life. Can you imagine
how that man feels?”
No, that man wasn’t the loneliest person in the world.
Maria knew the loneliest person on the face of this Earth:
herself. Nevertheless, she agreed with her client, hoping to get
a big tip, which she did. But his words made her realize that
she needed to find some way of freeing her clients from the
enormous pressure they all seemed to be under; this meant
both improving the quality of her services and the chance of
earning some extra money.
When she realized that releasing tension in the soul could
be as lucrative as releasing tension in the body, if not more
lucrative, she started going to the library again. She began
asking for books about marital problems, psychology and
politics; the librarian was delighted to see that the young
woman of whom she had grown so fond had stopped thinking
about sex and was now concentrating on more important
matters. Maria became a regular reader of newspapers,
especially, where possible, the financial pages, because the
majority of her clients were business executives. She sought
out self-help books, because her clients nearly all asked for her
advice. She read studies of the human emotions, because all
her clients were in some kind of emotional pain. Maria was a
respectable, rather unusual prostitute, and after six months, she
had acquired a large, faithful, very select clientele, thus
arousing the envy and jealousy, but also the admiration, of her
colleagues.
As for sex, it had as yet added nothing to her life: it was
just a matter of opening her legs, asking them to use a
condom, moaning a bit in the hope of getting a better tip
(thanks to the Filipino woman, Nyah, she had learned that
moaning could earn her another fifty francs), and taking a
shower afterwards, hoping that the water would wash her soul
clean. Nothing out of the ordinary and no kissing. For a
prostitute, the kiss was sacred. Nyah had taught her to keep her
kisses for the love of her life, just like in the story of Sleeping
Beauty; a kiss that would waken her from her slumbers and
return her to the world of fairy tales, in which Switzerland was
once more the country of chocolate, cows and clocks.
And no orgasms either, no pleasure or excitement. In her
search to be the very best, Maria had watched a few porn
movies, hoping to pick up tips for her work. She had seen a lot
of interesting things, but had preferred not to try any of them
out on her clients because they took too long, and Milan was
happiest when the women averaged three men a night.
By the end of the six months, Maria had sixty thousand
Swiss francs in a bank account; she ate in better restaurants,
had bought a TV (she never watched it, but she liked to have it
there) and was now seriously considering moving to a better
apartment. Although she could easily afford to buy books, she
continued going to the library, which was her bridge to the real
world, a more solid and enduring world. She enjoyed chatting
to the librarian, who was happy because Maria had perhaps
found a boyfriend and a job, although she never asked, the
Swiss being naturally shy and discreet (a complete fallacy,
because in the Copacabana and in bed, they were as
uninhibited, joyful or neurotic as any other nationality).
From Maria’s diary, one warm Sunday evening:
All men, tall or short, arrogant or unassuming, friendly or
cold, have one characteristic in common: when they come to
the club, they are afraid. The more experienced amongst them
hide their fear by talking loudly, the more inhibited cannot
hide their feelings and start drinking to see if they can drive
the fear away. But I am convinced that, with a few very rare
exceptions—the “special clients” to whom Milan has not yet
introduced me—they are all afraid.
Afraid of what? I’m the one who should be shaking. I’m the
one who leaves the club and goes off to a strange hotel, and
I’m not the one with the superior physical strength or the
weapons. Men are very strange, and I don’t just mean the ones
who come to the Copacabana, but all the men I’ve ever met.
They can beat you up, shout at you, threaten you, and yet
they’re scared to death of women really. Perhaps not the
woman they married, but there’s always one woman who
frightens them and forces them to submit to her caprices. Even
if it’s their own mother.
The men she had met since she arrived in Geneva always did
everything they could to appear confident, as if they were in
perfect control of the world and of their own lives; Maria,
however, could see in their eyes that they were afraid of their
wife, the feeling of panic that they might not be able to get an
erection, that they might not seem manly enough even to the
ordinary prostitute whom they were paying for her services. If
they went to a shop and didn’t like the shoes they had bought,
they would be quite prepared to go back, receipt in hand, and
demand a refund. And yet, even though they were paying for
some female company, if they didn’t manage to get an
erection, they would be too ashamed ever to go back to the
same club again because they would assume that all the other
women there would know.
“I’m the one who should feel ashamed for being unable to
arouse them, but, no, they always blame themselves.”
To avoid such embarrassments, Maria always tried to put
men at their ease, and if someone seemed drunker or more
fragile than usual, she would avoid full sex and concentrate
instead on caresses and masturbation, which always seemed to
please them immensely, absurd though this might seem, since
they could perfectly well masturbate on their own.
She had to make sure that they didn’t feel ashamed. These
men, so powerful and arrogant at work, constantly having to
deal with employees, customers, suppliers, prejudices, secrets,
posturings, hypocrisy, fear and oppression, ended their day in
a nightclub and they didn’t mind spending three hundred and
fifty Swiss francs to stop being themselves for a night.
“For a night? Now come on, Maria, you’re exaggerating.
It’s really only forty-five minutes, and if you allow time for
taking off clothes, making some phony gesture of affection,
having a bit of banal conversation and getting dressed again,
the amount of time spent actually having sex is about eleven
minutes.”
Eleven minutes. The world revolved around something that
only took eleven minutes.
And because of those eleven minutes in any one twentyfour-hour day (assuming that they all made love to their wives
every day, which is patently absurd and a complete lie) they
got married, supported a family, put up with screaming kids,
thought up ridiculous excuses to justify getting home late,
ogled dozens, if not hundreds of other women with whom they
would like to go for a walk around Lake Geneva, bought
expensive clothes for themselves and even more expensive
clothes for their wives, paid prostitutes to try to give them
what they were missing, and thus sustained a vast industry of
cosmetics, diet foods, exercise, pornography and power, and
yet when they got together with other men, contrary to popular
belief, they never talked about women. They talked about jobs,
money and sport.
Something was very wrong with civilization, and it wasn’t
the destruction of the Amazon rainforest or the ozone layer,
the death of the panda, cigarettes, carcinogenic foodstuffs or
prison conditions, as the newspapers would have it.
It was precisely the thing she was working with: sex.
But Maria wasn’t there to save humanity, but to increase
her bank balance, survive another six months of solitude and
another six months of the choice she had made, send a regular
monthly sum of money to her mother (who was thrilled to
learn that the earlier absence of money had been due to the
Swiss post, so much less efficient than the Brazilian postal
system), and to buy all the things she had always dreamed of
and never had. She moved to a much better apartment, with
central heating (although the summer had already arrived), and
from her window she could see a church, a Japanese
restaurant, a supermarket and a very nice café, where she used
to sit and read the newspapers. Otherwise, just as she had
promised herself, it was a question of putting up with the same
old routine: go to the Copacabana, have a drink and a dance,
what do you think of Brazil, then back to his hotel, get the
money up front, have a little conversation and know precisely
which points to touch—on both body and soul, but mainly the
soul—give some advice on personal problems, be his friend
for half an hour, of which eleven minutes would be spent in
opening her legs, closing her legs and pretending to moan with
pleasure. Thanks very much, see you next week, you’re very
manly, you know, tell me how things went next time we meet,
oh, that’s very generous of you, but really there’s no need, it’s
been a pleasure to spend time with you.
And, above all, never fall in love. That was the most
important and most sensible piece of advice that the other
Brazilian woman had given her, before she disappeared,
perhaps because she herself had fallen in love. Because,
incredible though it may seem, in just two months of working
there, Maria had had several proposals of marriage, of which
at least three were serious: the director of a firm of
accountants, the pilot she went with on the very first night, and
the owner of a shop specializing in knives. All three had
promised “to take her away from that life” and to give her a
nice house, a future, perhaps children and grandchildren.
And all for eleven minutes a day? It wasn’t possible. After
her experiences at the Copacabana, she knew that she wasn’t
the only person who felt lonely. Human beings can withstand a
week without water, two weeks without food, many years of
homelessness, but not loneliness. It is the worst of all tortures,
the worst of all sufferings. Like her, these men, and the many
others who sought her company, were all tormented by that
same destructive feeling, the sense that no one else on the
planet cared about them.
In order to avoid being tempted by love, she kept her heart
for her diary. She entered the Copacabana with only her body
and her brain, which was growing sharper and more perceptive
all the time. She had managed to persuade herself that there
was some important reason why she had come to Geneva and
ended up on Rue de Berne, and every time she borrowed a
book from the library she was confirmed in her view that no
one wrote properly about the eleven most important minutes of
the day. Perhaps that was her destiny, however hard it might
seem at the moment: to write a book, relating her story, her
adventure.
That was it, her adventure. Although it was a forbidden
word that no one dared to speak, and which most people
preferred to watch on the television, in films that were shown
over and over at all times of the day and night, that was what
she was looking for. It was a word that evoked deserts,
journeys to unknown places, idle conversations with
mysterious men on a boat in the middle of a river, plane
journeys, cinema studios, tribes of Indians, glaciers and
Africa.
She liked the idea of a book and had even thought of a title:
Eleven Minutes.
She began to put clients into three categories: the
Exterminators (in homage to a film she had enjoyed hugely),
who arrived stinking of drink, pretending not to look at
anyone, but convinced that everyone was looking at them,
dancing only briefly and then getting straight down to the
business of going back to their hotel. The Pretty Woman type
(again named after a film), who tried to appear elegant,
gentlemanly, affectionate, as if the world depended on such
kindness in order to continue turning on its axis, as if they had
just been walking down the street and had come into the club
by chance; they were always very sweet at first and rather
uncertain when they got to the hotel, but, because of that, they
always proved even more demanding than the Exterminators.
And lastly, there was The Godfather type (named after yet
another film), who treated a woman’s body as if it were a piece
of merchandise. They were the most genuine; they danced,
talked, never gave tips, knew what they were buying and how
much it was worth, and never let themselves be taken in by
anything the woman of their choice might say. They were the
only ones who, in a very subtle way, knew the meaning of the
word “Adventure.”
From Maria’s diary, on a day when she had her period and
couldn’t work:
If I were to tell someone about my life today, I could do it in a
way that would make them think me a brave, happy,
independent woman. Rubbish: I am not even allowed to
mention the only word that is more important than the eleven
minutes—love.
All my life, I thought of love as some kind of voluntary
enslavement. Well, that’s a lie: freedom only exists when love
is present. The person who gives him or herself wholly, the
person who feels freest, is the person who loves most
wholeheartedly.
And the person who loves wholeheartedly feels free.
That is why, regardless of what I might experience, do or
learn, nothing makes sense. I hope this time passes quickly, so
that I can resume my search for myself—in the form of a man
who understands me and does not make me suffer.
But what am I saying? In love, no one can harm anyone
else; we are each of us responsible for our own feelings and
cannot blame someone else for what we feel.
It hurt when I lost each of the various men I fell in love
with. Now, though, I am convinced that no one loses anyone,
because no one owns anyone.
That is the true experience of freedom: having the most
important thing in the world without owning it.
Another three months passed, and autumn came, as did the
date marked on the calendar: ninety days until her return
journey home. Everything had happened so quickly and so
slowly, she thought, realizing that time exists in two different
dimensions, depending on one’s state of mind, but in both
sorts of time her adventure was drawing to a close. She could,
of course, continue, but she could not forget the sad smile of
the invisible woman who had accompanied her on that walk
around the lake, telling her that things weren’t that simple.
However tempted she was to continue, however prepared she
was for the challenges she had met on her path, all these
months living alone with herself had taught her that there is
always a right moment to stop something. In ninety days’ time
she would return to the interior of Brazil, where she would buy
a small farm (she had earned rather more than she had
expected), a few cows (Brazilian, not Swiss), invite her mother
and father to come and live with her, take on a couple of
workers, and set the business in motion.
Although she believed that love is the only true experience
of freedom, and that no one can possess anyone else, she still
harbored a secret desire for revenge, and this formed part of
her triumphal return to Brazil. After setting up the farm, she
would go back to her hometown and make a large deposit in
Swiss francs at the bank where the boy who had two-timed her
with her best friend was working. “Hi, how are you? Don’t
you remember me?” he would say. She would pretend to be
trying hard to remember and would end up saying that, no, she
didn’t, she had just come back from a year in EU-ROPE (she
would say this very slowly so that all his colleagues would
hear). Or, rather, SWIT-ZER-LAND (that would sound more
exotic and adventurous than France), where they have the best
banks in the world.
Who was he? He would mention their schooldays. She
would say: “Ah, yes, I think I remember…,” but from her face
it would be clear that she didn’t. Vengeance would be hers,
and then it would just be a matter of working hard, and when
the farm was doing as well as she expected, she would be able
to devote herself to the thing that mattered most in her life:
finding her true love, the man who had been waiting for her all
these years, but whom she had not yet had the chance to meet.
Maria decided to forget all about writing the book entitled
Eleven Minutes. Now she needed to concentrate on the farm,
on her future plans, otherwise, she would end up postponing
her trip, a fatal risk.
That afternoon, she went off to meet her best—and only—
friend, the librarian. She asked for a book on cattle-raising and
farm administration. The librarian said:
“You know, a few months ago, when you came here
looking for books about sex, I began to fear for you. So many
pretty young girls let themselves be seduced by the illusion of
easy money, forgetting that, one day, they’ll be old and will
have missed out on meeting the love of their life.”
“Do you mean prostitution?”
“That’s a very strong word.”
“As I said, I’m working for a company that imports and
exports meat. But if I had to become a prostitute, would the
consequences be so very grave if I stopped at the right
moment? After all, being young inevitably means making
mistakes.”
“That’s what all the drug addicts say, that you just have to
know when to stop. But none of them do.”
“You must have been very pretty when you were younger
and you were brought up in a country that respects its
inhabitants. Was that enough for you to be happy?”
“I’m proud of how I dealt with any obstacles in my life.”
Should she go on, thought the librarian. Yes, why not, the
girl needed to learn a bit about life.
“I had a happy childhood, I studied at one of the best
schools in Berne, then I came to work in Geneva, where I met
and married the man I loved. I did everything for him and he
did everything for me; time passed and he retired. When he
was free to do exactly what he wanted with his time, his eyes
grew sadder, because he had probably never really thought
about himself all his life. We never had any serious arguments
or any great excitements, he was never unfaithful to me and
was never rude to me in public. We lived a very ordinary life,
so much so that, without a job to do, he felt useless,
unimportant, and, a year later, he died of cancer.”
She was telling the truth, but felt that she might be having a
negative influence on the girl standing before her.
“I still think it’s best to lead a life without surprises,” she
concluded. “If we hadn’t, my husband might have died even
earlier, who knows.”
Maria left, determined to learn all about farming. Since she
had the afternoon free, she decided to go for a stroll and, in the
upper part of the city, came across a small yellow plaque
bearing a drawing of a sun and an inscription: “Road to
Santiago.” What did it mean? There was a bar on the other
side of the road, and since she had now learned to ask about
anything she didn’t understand, she resolved to go in and ask.
“I’ve no idea,” said the girl serving behind the bar. It was a
very expensive place, and the coffee cost three times the
normal price. Since she had money, though, and now that she
was there, she ordered a coffee and decided to spend the next
hour or so learning all there was to know about farm
administration. She opened the book eagerly, but found it
impossible to concentrate—it was so boring. It would be much
more interesting to talk to one of her clients about it; they
always knew how best to handle money. She paid for her
coffee, got up, thanked the girl who had served her, left a large
tip (she had invented a superstitious belief according to which
the more you gave, the more you got back), went over to the
door, and, without realizing the importance of that moment,
heard the words that would change forever her plans, her
future, her farm, her idea of happiness, her female soul, her
male approach to life, her place in the world.
“Hang on a moment.”
Surprised, she glanced to one side. This was a respectable
bar, it wasn’t the Copacabana, where men had the right to say
that, although the women could always respond: “No, I’m
leaving and you can’t stop me.”
She was about to ignore the remark, but her curiosity got
the better of her, and she turned towards the voice. She saw a
very strange scene: kneeling on the floor, with various
paintbrushes scattered around him, was a long-haired young
man of about thirty (or should she have said: a boy of about
thirty? Her world had aged very fast), who was making a
drawing of a gentleman sitting in a chair, with a glass of
anisette beside him. She hadn’t noticed them when she came
in.
“Don’t go. I’ve nearly finished this portrait, and I’d like to
paint you as well.”
Maria replied—and as she did so, she created the link that
was lacking in the universe.
“No, I’m not interested.”
“You’ve got a special light about you. Let me at least do a
sketch.”
What was a “sketch”? What did he mean by “a special
light”? Besides, she was vain enough to want to have her
portrait painted by someone who appeared to be a serious
artist. Her imagination took flight. What if he was really
famous? She would be immortalized forever in a painting that
would be exhibited in Paris or in Salvador da Bahia! She
would become a legend!
On the other hand, what was the man doing, surrounded by
all that clutter, in an expensive, perhaps usually crowded café?
Guessing her thoughts, the waitress said softly:
“He’s a very well-known artist.”
Her intuition had been right. Maria tried not to show her
feelings and to remain calm.
“He comes here now and again, and he always brings an
important client with him. He says he likes the atmosphere,
that it inspires him; he’s doing a painting of people who
represent the city. It was commissioned by the town hall.”
Maria looked at the subject of the portrait. Again the
waitress read her thoughts.
“He’s a chemist who apparently made some really
revolutionary discovery. He won the Nobel Prize.”
“Don’t go,” said the painter again. “I’ll be finished in five
minutes. Order what you like and put it on my bill.”
As if hypnotized, she sat down at the bar, ordered an
anisette (she wasn’t used to drinking, and the only thing that
occurred to her was to order the same as the Nobel
prizewinner), and watched the man working. “I don’t represent
the city, so he must be interested in something else. But he’s
not really my type,” she thought automatically, repeating what
she always said to herself, ever since she had been working at
the Copacabana; it was her salvation, her voluntary denial of
the traps set by the heart. Having cleared that up, she didn’t
mind waiting awhile—perhaps the waitress was right, perhaps
this man could open doors to a world of which she knew
nothing.
She watched how quickly and adroitly he put the finishing
touches to his work; it was apparently a very large canvas, but
it was all rolled up, and so she couldn’t see what other faces he
had painted. What if this was a new opportunity? The man
(she had decided that he was a “man” and not a “boy,” because
otherwise she would start to feel old before her time) didn’t
seem the sort likely to make that kind of proposal just in order
to spend the night with her. Five minutes later, as promised, he
had finished his work, while Maria concentrated hard on
thinking about Brazil, about her brilliant future there, and her
complete lack of interest in meeting new people who might
jeopardize all her plans.
“Thanks, you can move now,” said the painter to the chemist,
who seemed to awaken from a dream.
And turning to Maria, he said simply:
“Sit in that corner and make yourself comfortable. The
light is wonderful.”
As if everything had been ordained by fate, as if it were the
most natural thing in the world, as if she had known this man
all her life or had already lived this moment in dreams and
now knew what to do in reality, Maria picked up her glass of
anisette, her bag, and the books on farm management, and
went over to the place indicated by the man—a table near the
window. He brought his brushes, the large canvas, a series of
small glass bottles full of various colors and a packet of
cigarettes, and knelt at her feet.
“Now don’t move.”
“That’s asking a lot; my life is in constant motion.”
Maria thought she was being terribly witty, but the man
ignored her remark. Trying to appear natural, because she
found the way the man looked at her most discomfiting, she
pointed across the road at the plaque:
“What is the ‘Road to Santiago’?”
“It’s a pilgrimage route. In the Middle Ages, people from
all over Europe would come along this street, heading for a
city in Spain, Santiago de Compostela.”
He folded over one part of the canvas and prepared his
brushes. Maria still didn’t know quite what to do.
“Do you mean that if I followed that street, I’d eventually
get to Spain?”
“Yes, in two or three months’ time. But can I just ask you a
favor? Stop talking; it will only take about ten minutes. And
take that package off the table.”
“They’re books,” she said, slightly irritated by his
authoritarian tone. She wanted him to know that he was
kneeling before a cultivated woman, who spent her time in
libraries not shops. But he himself picked up the package and
placed it unceremoniously on the floor.
She had failed to impress him. Not, of course, that she was
remotely interested in impressing him; she was off-duty now
and would save her seductive powers for later, for men who
would pay handsomely for her efforts. Why bother striking up
a relationship with a painter who might not even have enough
money to buy her a coffee? A man of thirty shouldn’t wear his
hair so long, it looked ridiculous. Why did she assume he had
no money? The waitress had said he was well-known, or was
it just the chemist who was famous? She studied his clothes,
but that didn’t help; life had taught her that the men who took
least care of their appearance—as with this painter—always
seemed to have more money than the men in suits and ties.
“What am I doing thinking about this man? What interests
me is the painting.”
Ten minutes of her time was not such a high price to pay
for the chance of being immortalized in a painting. She saw
that he was painting her alongside the prizewinning chemist
and she began to wonder if, after all, he would want some kind
of payment.
“Turn towards the window.”
Again she obeyed unquestioningly, which was not at all
like her. She sat looking at the people passing by, at the plaque
with the name of that road on it, thinking about how that road
had been there for centuries, how it had survived progress and
all the changes that had taken place in the world and in
mankind. Perhaps it was a good omen, perhaps that painting
would share the same fate and still be on display in a museum
in the city in five hundred years’ time…
The man started drawing, and, as the work progressed, she
lost that initial sense of excitement and, instead, began to feel
utterly insignificant. When she had gone into the café, she had
been a very confident woman, capable of making an extremely
difficult decision—leaving a job that earned her lots of money
—and taking up a still more difficult challenge—running a
farm back in her own country. Now, all her feelings of
insecurity about the world seemed to have resurfaced, a luxury
no prostitute can allow herself.
She finally worked out why she was feeling so
uncomfortable: for the first time in many months, someone
was looking at her not as an object, not even as a woman, but
as something she could not even comprehend; the closest she
could come to putting it into words was: “he’s seeing my soul,
my fears, my fragility, my inability to deal with a world which
I pretend to master, but about which I know nothing.”
Ridiculous, pure fantasy.
“I’d like…”
“Please, don’t talk,” said the man. “I can see your light
now.”
No one had ever said anything like that to her before. “I can
see your firm breasts,” “I can see your nicely rounded thighs,”
“I can see in you the exotic beauty of the tropics,” or, at most,
“I can see that you want to leave this life—let me set you up in
an apartment.” She was used to comments like that, but her
light? Did he mean the evening light?
“Your personal light,” he said, realizing that she didn’t
know what he was talking about.
Her personal light. Well, how wrong could he be, that
innocent painter, who obviously hadn’t learned much about
life in his thirty-odd years. But then, as everyone knows,
women mature more quickly than men, and although Maria
might not spend sleepless nights pondering her particular
philosophical problems, she knew one thing: she did not have
what that painter called “light” and which she took to mean “a
special glow.” She was just like everyone else, she endured her
loneliness in silence, tried to justify everything she did,
pretended to be strong when she was feeling weak or weak
when she was feeling strong, she had renounced love and
taken up a dangerous profession, but now, as that work was
coming to an end, she had plans for the future and regrets
about the past, and someone like that doesn’t have a “special
glow.” That must just be his way of keeping her quiet and still
and happy to be there, playing the fool.
Personal light, indeed. He could have said something else,
like “you’ve got a lovely profile.”
How does light enter a house? Through the open windows.
How does light enter a person? Through the open door of love.
And her door was definitely shut. He must be a terrible
painter; he didn’t understand anything.
“I’ve finished,” he said and started collecting up his things.
Maria didn’t move. She felt like asking if she could see the
painting, but that might seem rude, as if she didn’t trust what
he had done. Curiosity, however, got the better of her; she
asked and he concurred. He had painted only her face; it
looked like her, but if, one day, she had seen that painting, not
knowing who the model was, she would have said that it was
someone much stronger, someone full of a “light” she didn’t
see reflected in the mirror.
“My name’s Ralf Hart. If you like, I can buy you another
drink.”
“No, thank you.”
It would seem that the encounter was now taking a sadly
foreseeable turn: man tries to seduce woman.
“Two more anisettes, please,” he said, ignoring Maria’s
answer.
What else did she have to do? Read a boring book about
farm management. Walk around the lake, as she had hundreds
of times before. Or talk to someone who had seen in her a light
of which she knew nothing, and on the very date marked on
the calendar as the beginning of the end of her “experience.”
“What do you do?”
That was the question she did not want to hear, the question
that had made her avoid other encounters when, for one reason
or another, someone had approached her (though given the
natural discretion of the Swiss, this happened only rarely).
What possible answer could she give?
“I work in a nightclub.”
Right. An enormous load fell from her shoulders, and she
was pleased with all that she had learned since she had arrived
in Switzerland; ask questions (Who are the Kurds? What is the
road to Santiago?) and answer (I work in a nightclub) without
worrying about what other people might think.
“I have a feeling I’ve seen you before.”
Maria sensed that he wanted to take things further, and she
savored her small victory; the painter who, minutes before,
had been giving orders and had seemed so utterly sure of what
he wanted, had now gone back to being a man like any other
man, full of insecurity when confronted by a woman he didn’t
know.
“And what are those books?”
She showed them to him. Farm administration. The man
seemed to grow even more insecure.
“Are you a sex worker?”
He had shown his cards. Was she dressed like a prostitute?
Anyway, she needed to gain time. She was watching herself;
this was beginning to prove an interesting game, and she had
absolutely nothing to lose.
“Is that all men think about?”
He put the books back in the bag.
“Sex and farm management. How very dull.”
What! It was suddenly her turn to feel put on the spot. How
dare he speak ill of her profession? He still didn’t know
exactly what she did, though, he was just trying out a hunch,
but she had to give him an answer.
“Well, I can’t think of anything duller than painting; a static
thing, a movement frozen in time, a photograph that is never
faithful to the original. A dead thing that is no longer of any
interest to anyone, apart from painters, who are people who
think they’re important and cultivated, but who haven’t
evolved with the rest of the world. Have you ever heard of
Joan Miró? Well, I hadn’t until an Arab in a restaurant
mentioned the name, but knowing the name didn’t change
anything in my life.”
She wondered if she had gone too far, but then the drinks
arrived and the conversation was interrupted. They sat saying
nothing for a while. Maria thought it was probably time to
leave, and perhaps Ralf Hart thought the same. But before
them stood those two glasses full of that disgusting drink, and
that was a reason for them to continue sitting there together.
“Why the book on farm management?”
“What do you mean?”
“I’ve been to Rue de Berne. When you said you worked in
a nightclub, I remembered that I’d seen you before in that very
expensive place. I didn’t think of it while I was painting,
though: your ‘light’ was so strong.”
Maria felt the floor beneath her feet give way. For the first
time, she felt ashamed of what she did, even though she had
no reason to; she was working to keep herself and her family.
He was the one who should feel ashamed of going to Rue de
Berne; all the possible charm of that meeting had suddenly
vanished.
“Listen, Mr. Hart, I may be a Brazilian, but I’ve lived in
Switzerland for nine months now. I’ve learned that the reason
the Swiss are so discreet is because they live in a very small
country where almost everyone knows everyone else, as we
have just discovered, which is why no one ever asks what
other people do. Your remark was both inappropriate and very
rude, but if your aim was to humiliate me in order to make
yourself feel better, you’re wasting your time. Thanks for the
anisette, which is disgusting, by the way, but which I will
drink to the last drop. I will then smoke a cigarette, and,
finally, I’ll get up and leave. But you can leave right now, if
you want; we can’t have famous painters sitting at the same
table as a prostitute. Because that’s what I am, you see. A
prostitute. I’m a prostitute through and through, from head to
toe, and I don’t care who knows. That’s my one great virtue: I
refuse to deceive myself or you. Because it’s not worth it,
because you don’t merit a lie. Imagine if that famous chemist
over there were to find out what I am.”
She began to speak more loudly.
“Yes, I’m a prostitute! And do you know what? It’s set me
free—knowing that I’ll be leaving this godawful place in
exactly ninety days’ time, with loads of money, far better
educated, capable of choosing a good bottle of wine, with my
handbag stuffed with photographs of the snow, and knowing
all there is to know about men!”
The waitress was listening, horrified. The chemist seemed
not to notice. Perhaps it was just the alcohol talking, or the
feeling that soon she would once more be a woman from the
interior of Brazil, or perhaps it was the sheer joy of being able
to say what she did and to laugh at the shocked reactions, the
critical looks, the scandalized gestures.
“Do you understand, Mr. Hart? I’m a prostitute through and
through, from head to toe—and that’s my one great quality,
my virtue!”
He said nothing. He didn’t even move. Maria felt her
confidence returning.
“And you, sir, are a painter with no understanding of your
models. Perhaps the chemist sitting over there, dozing, lost to
the world, is really a railway worker. Perhaps none of the other
people in your painting are what they seem. I can’t understand
otherwise how you could possibly say that you could see a
‘special light’ in a woman who, as you discovered while you
were painting, IS NOTHING BUT A PRO-STI-TUTE!”
These last words were spoken very slowly and loudly. The
chemist woke up and the waitress brought the bill.
“This has nothing to do with you as prostitute, but with you
as woman.” Ralf ignored the proffered bill and replied equally
slowly, but quietly. “You have a glow about you. The light that
comes from sheer willpower, the light of someone who has
made important sacrifices in the name of things she thinks are
important. It’s in your eyes—the light is in your eyes.”
Maria felt disarmed; he had not taken up her challenge. She
had wanted to believe that he was simply trying to pick her up.
She was not allowed to think—at least not for the next ninety
days—that there were interesting men on the face of the Earth.
“You see that glass of anisette before you?” he went on.
“Now, you just see the anisette. I, on the other hand, because I
need to be inside everything I do, see the plant it came from,
the storms the plant endured, the hand that picked the grain,
the voyage by ship from another land, the smells and colors
with which the plant allowed itself to be imbued before it was
placed in the alcohol. If I were to paint this scene, I would
paint all those things, even though, when you saw the painting,
you would think you were looking at a simple glass of
anisette.
“In just the same way, while you were gazing out at the
street and thinking—because I know you were—about the
road to Santiago, I painted your childhood, your adolescence,
your lost, broken dreams, your dreams for the future, and your
will—which is what most intrigues me. When you saw your
portrait…”
Maria put up her guard, knowing that it would be very
difficult to lower it again later on.
“…I saw that light…even though all that was before me
was a woman who looked like you.”
Again that constrained silence. Maria looked at her watch.
“I have to go in a moment. Why did you say that sex is
boring?”
“You should know that better than me.”
“I know because it’s my job. I do the same thing every day.
But you’re a young man of thirty…”
“Twenty-nine.”
“…young, attractive, famous, who should be interested in
things like that, and who shouldn’t have to go to Rue de Berne
looking for company.”
“Well, I did. I went to bed with a few of your colleagues,
but not because I had any problem finding female company.
The problem lies with me.”
Maria felt a pang of jealousy, and was terrified. She really
must leave.
“It was my last try. I’ve given up now,” said Ralf, starting
to pick up the painting materials scattered on the floor.
“Have you got some physical problem?”
“No, I’m just not interested.”
This wasn’t possible.
“Pay the bill and let’s go for a walk. I think a lot of people
feel the same, but no one ever says so. It’s good to talk to
someone so honest.”
They set off along the road to Santiago, which first climbed
and then descended down to the river, then to the lake, then on
to the mountains, to end in some distant place in Spain. They
passed people going back to work after lunch, mothers with
their prams, tourists taking photographs of the splendid
fountain in the middle of the lake, Muslim women in their
headscarves, boys and girls out jogging, all of them pilgrims in
search of that mythological city, Santiago de Compostela,
which might not even exist, which might be a legend in which
people need to believe in order to give meaning to their lives.
Along this road walked by so many people, over so many
years, went that man with long hair, carrying a heavy bag full
of brushes, paints, canvas and pencils, and that woman,
slightly younger, with her bag full of books about farm
management. It did not occur to either of them to ask why they
were making that pilgrimage together, it was the most natural
thing in the world; he knew everything about her, although she
knew nothing about him.
Which is why she decided to ask—now that her policy was
always to ask. At first, he reacted shyly, but she knew how to
wheedle information out of men, and he ended up telling her
that he had been married twice (a record for a twenty-nineyear-old!), had travelled widely, met kings and queens and
famous actors, been to unforgettable parties. He had been born
in Geneva, but had lived in Madrid, Amsterdam, New York,
and in a city in the south of France, called Tarbes, which
wasn’t on any of the usual tourist circuits, but which he loved
because it was so close to the mountains and because its
inhabitants were so warmhearted. He had been discovered as
an artist when he was only twenty, when an important art
dealer happened to visit a Japanese restaurant in Geneva
decorated with his work. He had earned a lot of money, he was
young and healthy, he could do anything, go anywhere, meet
anyone he liked, he had known all the pleasures a man could
know, he did what he most enjoyed doing, and yet, despite
everything, fame, money, women, travel, he was unhappy, and
had only one joy in his life—his work.
“Were you very hurt by women?” she asked, realizing at
once what an idiotic question it was, straight out of some
manual entitled Everything Women Should Know If They Want
to Get Their Man.
“No, they never hurt me. I was very happy in both my
marriages. I was unfaithful and so were they, just like any
other normal couple. Then, after a while, I simply lost interest
in sex. I still felt love, still needed company, but sex…but,
why are we talking about sex?”
“Because, as you yourself said, I’m a prostitute.”
“My life isn’t very interesting really. I’m an artist who
found success very young, which is rare, and even rarer in the
world of painting. I could paint anything now and it would be
worth a fortune, which, of course, infuriates the critics because
they think they are the only ones who know about ‘art.’ Other
people think I’ve got all the answers, and the less I say, the
more intelligent they think I am.”
He went on talking about his life, how every week he was
invited to something somewhere in the world. He had an agent
who lived in Barcelona—did she know where that was? Yes,
Maria knew, it was in Spain. This agent dealt with everything
to do with money, invitations, exhibitions, but never pressured
him to do anything he didn’t want to do, now that, after years
of work, there was a steady demand for his paintings.
“Do you find my story interesting?” he asked, and his voice
betrayed a touch of insecurity.
“It’s certainly an unusual one. Lots of people would like to
be in your shoes.”
Ralf wanted to know about Maria.
“Well, there are three of me, really, depending on who I’m
with. There’s the Innocent Girl, who gazes admiringly at the
man, pretending to be impressed by his tales of power and
glory. Then there’s the Femme Fatale, who pounces on the
most insecure and, by doing so, takes control of the situation
and relieves them of responsibility, because then they don’t
have to worry about anything. And, finally, there’s the
Understanding Mother, who looks after those in need of advice
and who listens with an all-comprehending air to stories that
go in one ear and out the other. Which of the three would you
like to meet?”
“You.”
Maria told him everything, because she needed to—it was
the first time she had done so since she left Brazil. She
realized that, despite her somewhat unconventional job,
nothing very exciting had happened apart from that week in
Rio and her first month in Switzerland. Otherwise, it had been
home, work, home, work—and nothing else.
When she finished speaking, they were sitting in another
bar, this time on the other side of the city, far from the road to
Santiago, each of them thinking about what fate had reserved
for the other.
“Did I leave anything out?” she asked.
“How to say ‘goodbye.’”
Yes, it had not been an afternoon like any other. She felt
tense and anxious, for she had opened a door which she didn’t
know how to close.
“When can I see the whole painting?”
Ralf gave her the card of his agent in Barcelona.
“Phone her in about six months’ time, if you’re still in
Europe. The Faces of Geneva, famous people and anonymous
people. It will be exhibited for the first time in a gallery in
Berlin. Then it will tour Europe.”
Maria remembered her calendar, the ninety days that
remained, and the dangers posed by any relationship, any
bond. She thought:
“What is more important in life? Living or pretending to
live? Should I take a risk and say that this has been the
loveliest afternoon I’ve spent in all the time I’ve been here?
Should I thank him for listening to me without criticism and
without comment? Or should I simply don the armor of the
woman with willpower, with the ‘special light,’ and leave
without saying anything?”
While they were walking along the road to Santiago and
while she was listening to herself telling him about her life,
she had been a happy woman. She could content herself with
that; it was enough of a gift from life.
“I’ll come and see you,” said Ralf Hart.
“No, don’t. I’ll be going back to Brazil soon. We have
nothing more to give each other.”
“I’ll come and see you as a client.”
“That would be humiliating for me.”
“I’ll come and see you so that you can save me.”
He had made that comment early on, about his lack of
interest in sex. She wanted to tell him that she felt the same,
but she stopped herself—she had said “no” too many times; it
would be best to say nothing.
How pathetic. There she was with the little boy again, only
he wasn’t asking her for a pencil now, just a little company.
She looked at her own past, and, for the first time, she forgave
herself: it hadn’t been her fault, but the fault of that insecure
little boy, who had given up after the first attempt. They were
children and that’s how children are—neither she nor the boy
had been in the wrong, and that gave her a great sense of
relief, made her feel better; she hadn’t betrayed the first
opportunity that life had presented her with. We all do the
same thing: it’s part of the initiation of every human being in
search of his or her other half; these things happen.
Now, though, the situation was different. However
convincing her reasons (I’m going back to Brazil, I work in a
nightclub, we hardly know each other, I’m not interested in
sex, I don’t want anything to do with love, I need to learn how
to manage a farm, I don’t understand painting, we live in
different worlds), life had thrown down a challenge. She
wasn’t a child any more, she had to choose.
She preferred to say nothing. She shook his hand, as was
the custom there, and went home. If he was the man she
wanted him to be, he would not be intimidated by her silence.
Extract from Maria’s diary, written that same day:
Today, while we were walking around the lake, along that
strange road to Santiago, the man who was with me—a
painter, with a life entirely different from mine—threw a pebble
into the water. Small circles appeared where the pebble fell,
which grew and grew until they touched a duck that happened
to be passing and which had nothing to do with the pebble.
Instead of being afraid of that unexpected wave, he decided to
play with it.
Some hours before that scene, I went into a café, heard a
voice, and it was as if God had thrown a pebble into that
place. The waves of energy touched both me and a man sitting
in a corner painting a portrait. He felt the vibrations of that
pebble, and so did I. So what now?
The painter knows when he has found a model. The
musician knows when his instrument is well tuned. Here, in my
diary, I am aware that there are certain phrases which are not
written by me, but by a woman full of “light”; I am that
woman though I refuse to accept it.
I could carry on like this, but I could also, like the duck on
the lake, have fun and take pleasure in that sudden ripple that
set the water rocking.
There is a name for that pebble: passion. It can be used to
describe the beauty of an earth-shaking meeting between two
people, but it isn’t just that. It’s there in the excitement of the
unexpected, in the desire to do something with real fervor, in
the certainty that one is going to realize a dream. Passion
sends us signals that guide us through our lives, and it’s up to
me to interpret those signs.
I would like to believe that I’m in love. With someone I
don’t know and who didn’t figure in my plans at all. All these
months of self-control, of denying love, have had exactly the
opposite result: I have let myself be swept away by the first
person to treat me a little differently.
It’s just as well I don’t have his phone number, that I don’t
know where he lives; that way I can lose him without having to
blame myself for another missed opportunity.
And if that is what happens, if I have already lost him, I
will at least have gained one very happy day in my life.
Considering the way the world is, one happy day is almost a
miracle.
When she arrived at the Copacabana that night, he was there,
waiting for her. He was the only customer. Milan, who had
been following her life with some interest, saw that she had
lost the battle.
“Would you like a drink?” the man asked.
“I have to work. I can’t risk losing my job.”
“I’m here as a customer. I’m making a professional
proposition.”
This man, who had seemed so sure of himself that
afternoon in the café, who wielded a paintbrush with such
skill, met important people, had an agent in Barcelona and
doubtless earned a lot of money, was now revealing his
fragility; he had entered a world he should not have entered;
he was no longer in a romantic café on the road to Santiago.
The charm of the afternoon vanished.
“So, would you like a drink?”
“I will another time. I have clients waiting for me tonight.”
Milan overheard these last words; he was wrong, she had
not allowed herself to be caught in the trap of promises of
love. He nevertheless wondered, at the end of a rather slack
night, why she had preferred the company of an old man, a
dull accountant and an insurance salesman…
Oh, well, it was her problem. As long as she paid her
commission, it wasn’t up to him to decide who she should or
shouldn’t go to bed with.
From Maria’s diary, after that night with the old man, the
accountant and the insurance salesman:
What does this painter want of me? Doesn’t he realize that we
are from different countries, cultures and sexes? Does he think
I know more about pleasure than he does and wants to learn
something from me?
Why didn’t he say anything else to me, apart from “I’m
here as a customer”? It would have been so easy for him to
say: “I missed you” or “I really enjoyed the afternoon we
spent together.” I would respond in the same way (I’m a
professional), but he should understand my insecurities,
because I’m a woman, I’m fragile, and when I’m in that place,
I’m a different person.
He’s a man. He’s an artist. He should know that the great
aim of every human being is to understand the meaning of
total love. Love is not to be found in someone else, but in
ourselves; we simply awaken it. But in order to do that, we
need the other person. The universe only makes sense when we
have someone to share our feelings with.
He says he’s tired of sex. So am I, and yet neither of us
really knows what that means. We are allowing one of the most
important things in life to die—he should have saved me, I
should have saved him, but he left me no choice.
She was terrified. She was beginning to realize that after long
months of self-control, the pressure, the earthquake, the
volcano of her soul was showing signs that it was about to
erupt, and the moment that this happened, she would have no
way of controlling her feelings. Who was this wretched
painter, who might well be lying about his life and with whom
she had spent only a few hours, who had not touched her or
tried to seduce her—could there be anything worse?
Why were alarm bells ringing in her heart? Because she
sensed that the same thing was happening to him, but no, she
must be wrong. Ralf Hart just wanted to find a woman capable
of awakening in him the fire that had almost burned out; he
wanted to make her into some kind of personal sex goddess,
with her “special light” (he was being honest about that), who
would take him by the hand and show him the road back to
life. He couldn’t imagine that Maria felt the same indifference,
that she had her own problems (even after so many men, she
had still never achieved orgasm when having ordinary
penetrative sex), that she had been making plans that very
morning and was organizing a triumphant return to her
homeland.
Why was she thinking about him? Why was she thinking
about someone who, at that very moment, might be painting
another woman, saying that she had a “special light,” that she
could be his sex goddess?
“I’m thinking about him because I was able to talk to him.”
How ridiculous! Did she think about the librarian? No. Did
she think about Nyah, the Filipino girl, the only one of all the
women who worked at the Copacabana with whom she could
share some of her feelings? No, she didn’t. And they were
people with whom she had often talked and with whom she
felt comfortable.
She tried to divert her attention to thoughts of how hot it
was, or to the supermarket she hadn’t managed to get to
yesterday. She wrote a long letter to her father, full of details
about the piece of land she would like to buy—that would
make her family happy. She did not give a date for her return,
but she hinted that it would be soon. She slept, woke up, slept
again and woke again. She realized that the book about
farming was fine for Swiss farmers, but completely useless for
Brazilians—they were two entirely different worlds.
As the afternoon wore on, she noticed that the earthquake,
the volcano, the pressure was diminishing. She felt more
relaxed; this kind of sudden passion had happened before and
had always subsided by the next day—good, her universe
continued unchanged. She had a family who loved her, a man
who was waiting for her and who now wrote to her frequently,
telling her that the draper’s shop was expanding. Even if she
decided to get on a plane that night, she had enough money to
buy a small farm. She had got through the worst part, the
language barrier, the loneliness, the first night in the restaurant
with that Arab man, the way in which she had persuaded her
soul not to complain about what she was doing with her body.
She knew what her dream was and she was prepared to do
anything to achieve it. And that dream did not, by the way,
include men, at least not men who didn’t speak her mother
tongue or live in her hometown.
When the earthquake had subsided, Maria realized she was
partly to blame. Why had she not said to him: “I’m lonely, I’m
as miserable as you are, yesterday you saw my ‘light,’ and it
was the first nice, honest thing a man has said to me since I got
here.”
On the radio they were playing an old song: “my loves die
even before they’re born.” Yes, that was what happened with
her, that was her fate.
From Maria’s diary, two days after everything had returned to
normal:
Passion makes a person stop eating, sleeping, working, feeling
at peace. A lot of people are frightened because, when it
appears, it demolishes all the old things it finds in its path.
No one wants their life thrown into chaos. That is why a lot
of people keep that threat under control, and are somehow
capable of sustaining a house or a structure that is already
rotten. They are the engineers of the superseded.
Other people think exactly the opposite: they surrender
themselves without a second thought, hoping to find in passion
the solutions to all their problems. They make the other person
responsible for their happiness and blame them for their
possible unhappiness. They are either euphoric because
something marvelous has happened or depressed because
something unexpected has just ruined everything.
Keeping passion at bay or surrendering blindly to it—
which of these two attitudes is the least destructive?
I don’t know.
On the third day, as if risen from the dead, Ralf Hart returned,
almost too late, for Maria was already talking to another
customer. When she saw him, though, she politely told the
other man that she didn’t want to dance, that she was waiting
for someone else.
Only then did she realize that she had spent the last three
days waiting for him. And at that moment, she accepted
everything that fate had placed in her path.
She didn’t get angry with herself; she was happy, she could
allow herself that luxury, because one day she would leave this
city; she knew this love was impossible, and yet, expecting
nothing, she could nevertheless have everything she still hoped
for from that particular stage in her life.
Ralf asked her if she would like a drink, and Maria asked
for a fruit juice cocktail. The owner of the bar, pretending that
he was washing glasses, stared uncomprehendingly at her:
what had made her change her mind? He hoped they wouldn’t
just sit there drinking, and felt relieved when Ralf asked her to
dance. They were following the ritual; there was no reason to
feel worried.
Maria felt Ralf’s hand on her waist, his cheek pressed to
hers, and the music—thank God—was too loud for them to
talk. One fruit juice cocktail wasn’t enough to give her
courage, and the few words they had exchanged had been very
formal. Now it was just a question of time: would they go to a
hotel? Would they make love? It shouldn’t be difficult, since
he had already said that he wasn’t interested in sex—it would
just be a matter of going through the motions. On the other
hand, that lack of interest would help to kill off any vestige of
potential passion—she didn’t know now why she had put
herself through such torment after their first meeting.
Tonight she would be the Understanding Mother. Ralf Hart
was just another desperate man, like millions of others. If she
played her role well, if she managed to follow the rules she
had laid down for herself since she began working at the
Copacabana, there was no reason to worry. It was very
dangerous, though, having that man so near, now that she
could smell him—and she liked the way he smelled—now that
she could feel his touch—and she liked his touch—now that
she realized she had been waiting for him—she did not like
that.
Within forty-five minutes they had fulfilled all the rules, and
the man went over to the owner of the bar and said:
“I’m going to spend the rest of the night with her. I’ll pay
you as if I were three clients.”
The owner shrugged and thought again that the Brazilian
girl would end up falling into the trap of love. Maria, for her
part, was surprised: she hadn’t realized that Ralf Hart knew the
rules so well.
“Let’s go back to my house.”
Perhaps that was the best thing to do, she thought.
Although it went against all of Milan’s advice, she decided, in
this case, to make an exception. Apart from finding out once
and for all whether or not he was married, she would also find
out how famous painters live, and one day she would be able
to write an article for her local newspaper, so that everyone
would know that, during her time in Europe, she had moved in
intellectual and artistic circles.
“What an absurd excuse!” she thought.
Half an hour later, they arrived at a small village near
Geneva, called Cologny; there was a church, a bakery, a town
hall, everything in its proper place. And he really did live in a
two-storey house, not an apartment! First reaction: he really
must be rich. Second reaction: if he were married, he wouldn’t
dare to do this, because they would be bound to be seen by
someone.
So, he was rich and single.
They went into a hall from which a staircase ascended to
the second floor, but they went straight ahead to the two rooms
at the back that looked onto the garden. There was a dining
table in one of the rooms, and the walls were crowded with
paintings. In the other room were sofas and chairs, packed
bookshelves, overflowing ashtrays and dirty glasses that had
clearly been there for a long time.
“Would you like a coffee?”
Maria shook her head. No, she wouldn’t. You can’t treat me
differently just yet. I’m confronting my own demons, doing
exactly the opposite of what I promised myself I would do.
But let’s take things slowly; tonight I’ll play the part of
prostitute or friend or Understanding Mother, even though in
my soul I’m a Daughter in need of affection. When it’s all
over, then you can make me a coffee.
“At the bottom of the garden is my studio, my soul. Here,
amongst all these paintings and books, is my brain, what I
think.”
Maria thought of her own apartment. She had no garden at
the back. She did not even have any books, apart from those
she borrowed from the library, since there was no point in
spending money on something she could get for free. There
were no paintings either, apart from a poster for the Shanghai
Acrobatic Circus, which she dreamed of going to one day.
Ralf picked up a bottle of whisky and offered her a glass.
“No, thank you.”
He poured himself a drink and swallowed it down in one—
without ice, without time to savor it. He started talking about
intelligent things, but, however interesting the conversation,
she knew that he too was afraid of what was going to happen,
now that they were alone. Maria had regained control of the
situation.
Ralf poured himself another whisky and, as if he were
making some utterly inconsequential remark, he said:
“I need you.”
A pause. A long silence. Don’t help to break that silence,
let’s see what he does next.
“I need you, Maria. Because you have a light, although I
don’t really think you believe me yet, and think I’m just trying
to seduce you with my words. Don’t ask me: ‘Why me?
What’s so special about me?’ There isn’t anything special
about you, at least, nothing I can put my finger on. And yet—
and here’s the mystery of life—I can’t think of anything else.”
“I wasn’t going to ask you,” she lied.
“If I were looking for an explanation, I would say: the
woman in front of me has managed to overcome suffering and
to transform it into something positive, something creative, but
that doesn’t explain everything.”
It was becoming difficult to escape. He went on:
“And what about me? I have my creativity, I have my
paintings, which are sought after by galleries all over the
world, I have realized my dream, my village thinks of me as a
beloved son, my ex-wives never ask me for alimony or
anything like that, I have good health, reasonable looks,
everything a man could want…. And yet here I am saying to a
woman I met in a café and with whom I have spent one
afternoon: ‘I need you.’ Do you know what loneliness is?”
“I do.”
“But you don’t know what loneliness is like when you have
the chance to be with other people all the time, when you get
invitations every night to parties, cocktail parties, opening
nights at the theater…when women are always ringing you up,
women who love your work, who say how much they would
like to have supper with you—they’re beautiful, intelligent,
educated women. But something pushes you away and says:
‘Don’t go. You won’t enjoy yourself. You’ll spend the whole
night trying to impress them and squander your energies
proving to yourself how you can charm the whole world.’
“So I stay at home, go into my studio and try to find the
light I saw in you, and I can only see that light when I’m
working.”
“What can I give you that you don’t already have?” she
asked, feeling slightly humiliated by that remark about other
women, but remembering that he had, after all, paid to have
her at his side.
He drank a third glass of whisky. Maria accompanied him
in her imagination, the alcohol burning his throat and his
stomach, entering his bloodstream and filling him with
courage, and she too began to feel drunk, even though she
hadn’t touched a drop. When Ralf spoke again, his voice
sounded steadier:
“I can’t buy your love, but you did tell me that you knew
everything about sex. Teach me, then. Or teach me something
about Brazil. Anything, just as long as I can be with you.”
What next?
“I only know two places in my own country: the town I
was born in and Rio de Janeiro. As for sex, I don’t think I can
teach you anything. I’m nearly twenty-three, you’re about six
years older, but I know you’ve lived life very intensely. I know
men who pay me to do what they want, not what I want.”
“I’ve done everything a man could dream of doing with
one, two, even three women at the same time. And I don’t
think I learned very much.”
Silence again, except that this time it was Maria’s turn to
speak. And he did not help her, just as she had not helped him
before.
“Do you want me as a professional?”
“I want you however you want to be wanted.”
No, he couldn’t have said that, because that was precisely
what she had wanted to hear. The earthquake, the volcano, the
storm returned. It was going to be impossible to escape her
own trap, she would lose this man without ever really having
him.
“You know what I mean, Maria. Teach me. Perhaps that
will save me, perhaps it will save you and bring us both back
to life. You’re right, I am only six years older than you, and
yet I’ve lived enough for several lives. Our experiences have
been entirely different, but we are both desperate people; the
only thing that brings us any peace is being together.”
Why was he saying these things? It wasn’t possible, and yet
it was true. They had only met once before and yet they
already needed each other. Imagine what would happen if they
continued seeing each other; it would be disastrous! Maria was
an intelligent woman, with many months behind her now of
reading and of observing humankind; she had an aim in life,
but she also had a soul, which she needed to know in order to
discover her “light.” She was becoming tired of being who she
was, and although her imminent return to Brazil was an
interesting challenge, she had not yet learned all she could.
Ralf Hart was a man who had accepted challenges and had
learned everything, and now he was asking this woman, this
prostitute, this Understanding Mother, to save him. How
absurd!
Other men had behaved like this with her. Many of them
had been unable to have an erection, others had wanted to be
treated like children, others had said that they would like her
to be their wife because it excited them to know that she had
had so many lovers. Although she had still not met any of the
“special clients,” she had already discovered the vast universe
of fantasies that fills the human soul. But they were all used to
their own worlds and none of them had said to her: “take me
away from here.” On the contrary, they wanted to take Maria
with them.
And even though those many men had always left her with
money, but drained of energy, she must have learned
something. If one of them had really been looking for love,
and if sex really was only part of that search, how would she
like to be treated? What did she think should happen on a first
meeting?
What would she really like to happen?
“I’d like a gift,” said Maria.
Ralf Hart didn’t understand. A gift? He had already paid
for that night in advance, while they were in the taxi, because
he knew the ritual. What did she mean?
Maria had suddenly realized that she knew, at that moment,
what a man and a woman needed to feel. She took his hand
and led him into one of the sitting rooms.
“We won’t go up to the bedroom,” she said.
She turned out almost all the lights, sat down on the carpet
and asked him to sit down opposite her. She noticed that there
was a fire in the room.
“Light the fire.”
“But it’s summer.”
“Light the fire. You asked me to guide our steps tonight and
that’s what I’m doing.”
She gave him a steady look, hoping that he would again see
her “light.” He obviously did, because he went out into the
garden, collected some wood still wet with rain, and picked up
some old newspapers so that the fire would dry the wood and
get it to burn. He went into the kitchen to fetch more whisky,
but Maria called him back.
“Did you ask me what I wanted?”
“No, I didn’t.”
“Well, the person you’re with has to exist too. Think of her.
Think if she wants whisky or gin or coffee. Ask her what she
wants.”
“What would you like to drink.”
“Wine. And I’d like you to keep me company.”
He put down the whisky bottle and returned with a bottle of
wine. By this time, the fire was already beginning to burn;
Maria turned out the few remaining lights, so that the flames
were the only illumination in the room. She behaved as if she
had always known that this was the first step: recognizing the
other person and knowing that he or she was there.
She opened her handbag and found inside a pen she had
bought in a supermarket. Anything would do.
“This is for you. I bought it so that I could note down some
ideas about farm management. I used it for two days, I worked
until I was too tired to work anymore. It contains some of my
sweat, some of my concentration and my willpower, and I’m
giving it to you now.”
She placed the pen gently in his hand.
“Instead of buying something that you would like to have,
I’m giving you something that is mine, truly mine. A gift. A
sign of respect for the person before me, asking him to
understand how important it is to be by his side. Now he has a
small part of me with him, which I gave him with my free,
spontaneous will.”
Ralf got up, went over to a shelf and returned, carrying
something. He held it out to Maria.
“This is a carriage belonging to an electric train set I had
when I was a child. I wasn’t allowed to play with it on my
own, because my father said it had been imported from the
United States and was very expensive. So I had to wait until he
felt like setting up the train in the living room, but he spent
most Sundays listening to opera. That’s why the train survived
my childhood, but never gave me any happiness. I’ve still got
all the track, the engine, the houses, even the manual, because
I had a train that wasn’t mine and with which I never played.
“I wish I’d destroyed it along with all the other toys I was
given and which I’ve since forgotten all about, because that
passion for destruction is part of how a child discovers the
world. But this pristine train set always reminds me of a part
of my childhood that I never lived, because it was too precious
and it meant too much work for my father. Or perhaps it was
just that whenever he set the train up, he was afraid he might
show his love for me.”
Maria began staring into the fire. Something was
happening, and it wasn’t just the wine or the cozy atmosphere.
It was that exchange of gifts.
Ralf turned to the fire too. They said nothing, listening to
the crackle of the flames. They drank their wine, as if it didn’t
matter that they said nothing, did nothing. They were just
there, together, staring in the same direction.
“I have a lot of pristine train sets in my life too,” said
Maria, after a while. “One of them is my heart. And I only
played with it when the world set out the tracks, and then it
wasn’t always the right moment.”
“But you loved.”
“Oh, yes, I loved, I loved very deeply. I loved so deeply
that when my love asked me for a gift, I took fright and fled.”
“I don’t understand.”
“You don’t have to. I’m teaching you because I’ve
discovered something I didn’t know before. The giving of
gifts. Giving something of one’s own. Giving something
important rather than asking. You have my treasure: the pen
with which I wrote down some of my dreams. I have your
treasure: the carriage of a train, part of your childhood that you
did not live.
“I carry with me part of your past, and you carry with you a
little of my present. Isn’t that lovely?”
She said all this without blinking, and without surprise, as
if she had known for ages that this was the best and only way
to behave. She got lightly to her feet, took her jacket from the
coat rack and kissed Ralf on the cheek. Ralf Hart did not make
any move to get up, hypnotized by the fire, perhaps thinking
about his father.
“I never understood why I kept that carriage. Now I do: it
was in order to give it to you one night before an open fire.
Now the house feels lighter.”
He said that the next day he would give the rest of the
tracks, engines, smoke pills, to some children’s home.
“It could be a rarity, of a kind that isn’t made any more; it
could be worth a lot of money,” said Maria, but immediately
regretted her words. That wasn’t what mattered, the point was
to free yourself from something that cost your heart even
more.
Before she said anything else that did not quite chime with
the moment, she again kissed him on the cheek and walked to
the front door. He was still gazing into the fire, and she had to
ask him softly if he would open the door for her.
Ralf got up, and she explained that, although she was glad
to see him staring into the fire, Brazilians have a strange
superstition: when you visit someone for the first time, you
must not be the one to open the door when you leave, because
if you do, you will never return to that house.
“And I want to come back.”
“Although we didn’t take our clothes off and I didn’t come
inside you, or even touch you, we’ve made love.”
She laughed. He offered to take her home, but she refused.
“I’ll come and see you tomorrow, then, at the Copacabana.”
“No, don’t Wait a week. I’ve learned that waiting is the
most difficult bit, and I want to get used to the feeling,
knowing that you’re with me, even when you’re not by my
side.”
She walked back through the cold and the dark, as she had so
many times before in Geneva; normally, these walks were
associated with sadness, loneliness, the desire to go back to
Brazil, financial calculations, timetables, nostalgia for the
language she hadn’t spoken freely for ages.
Now, though, she was walking in order to find herself, to
find that woman who had sat with a man by a fire for forty
minutes and who was full of light, wisdom, experience and
charm. She had seen that woman’s face a long time ago, when
she was walking by the lakeside wondering whether or not she
should devote herself to a life that wasn’t hers—on that
afternoon, the woman had a terribly sad smile on her face. She
had seen her for a second time on that folded canvas, and now
she was with her again. She only caught a taxi after she had
walked quite a way, when the magic presence had gone,
leaving her alone again, as usual.
It was best not to think too much about it all, so as not to
spoil it, so as not to let the beauty of what she had just
experienced be replaced by anxiety. If that other Maria really
existed, she would return when the moment was right.
An extract from the diary Maria wrote on the night she was
given the train carriage:
Profound desire, true desire is the desire to be close to
someone. From that point onwards, things change, the man
and the woman come into play, but what happens before—the
attraction that brought them together—is impossible to
explain. It is untouched desire in its purest state.
When desire is still in this pure state, the man and the
woman fall in love with life, they live each moment reverently,
consciously, always ready to celebrate the next blessing.
When people feel like this, they are not in a hurry, they do
not precipitate events with unthinking actions. They know that
the inevitable will happen, that what is real always finds a way
of revealing itself. When the moment comes, they do not
hesitate, they do not miss an opportunity, they do not let slip a
single magic moment, because they respect the importance of
each second.
In the days that followed, Maria found herself once more
caught in the trap she had tried so hard to avoid, but she felt
neither sad nor concerned. On the contrary, now that she had
nothing to lose, she was free.
She knew that, however romantic the situation, one day,
Ralf Hart would realize that she was just a prostitute, while he
was a respected artist, that she lived in a far-off country that
was in a state of permanent crisis, while he lived in paradise,
with his life organized and protected from birth. He had
received his education in the best schools, museums and art
galleries of the world, while she had barely finished secondary
school. Dreams like theirs never lasted long, and Maria had
enough experience of life to know that reality usually chose
not to fit in with her dreams. And that was now her great joy:
to say to reality that she didn’t need it, that she was no longer
dependent on what happened in order to be happy.
“God, I’m such a romantic.”
During the week, she tried to think of something that would
make Ralf Hart happy; for he had restored to her a dignity and
a “light” that she thought were lost forever. But the only way
she had of repaying him was with the thing he thought was her
specialty: sex. Since there was little to inspire her in the
routine at the Copacabana, she decided to look elsewhere.
She again went to see a few porn movies, and again found
nothing of interest in them, apart, perhaps, from the varying
number of people involved. When films proved of no help, she
decided, for the first time since she had arrived in Geneva, to
buy some books, although she still didn’t see the point in
cluttering up her apartment with something which, once read,
had no further use. She went to the bookshop she had seen
when she and Ralf had walked down the road to Santiago, and
asked if they had any books about sex.
“Oh, loads,” said the shop assistant. “In fact, it seems to be
all people care about. There’s a special section devoted to the
subject, but in just about every other novel you can see around
you there’s always at least one sex scene. Whether it’s hidden
away in pretty little love stories or discussed in serious tomes
on human behavior, it appears to be all anyone thinks about.”
Maria, with all her experience, knew that the woman was
wrong: people wanted to think like that because they thought
sex was everyone else’s sole concern. They went on diets,
wore wigs, spent hours at the hairdresser’s or at the gym, put
on sexy clothes, all in an attempt to awaken the necessary
spark. And what happened? When the moment came to go to
bed with someone, eleven minutes later it was all over. There
was no creativity involved, nothing that would lift them up to
paradise; the fire provoked by the spark soon burned out.
But there was no point arguing with the young blonde
woman, who believed that the world could be explained in
books. She asked to be directed to the special section, and
there she found various books about gay men, lesbians, nuns
revealing scandals in the church, illustrated books showing
oriental techniques, all involving extremely uncomfortable
positions, but only one of the titles interested her: Sacred Sex.
At least it was different.
She bought it, went home, tuned to a particular radio
station that always helped her to think (because they played
such calming music), opened the book and noticed various
illustrations, showing postures that only a circus performer
could possibly hope to achieve. The text itself was very dull.
Maria had learned enough in her profession to know that
not everything in life is a matter of what position you adopt
when making love, and that any variation usually occurs
naturally, without thinking, like the steps in a dance.
Nevertheless, she tried to concentrate on what she was
reading.
Two hours later, she had come to two conclusions.
First, she needed to eat supper, because she had to get back
to the Copacabana.
Second, the person who had written the book clearly
understood nothing, absolutely nothing about the subject. It
was just a lot of empty theory, New Age mumbo-jumbo,
pointless rituals and idiotic suggestions. She noticed that the
author had studied meditation in the Himalayas (she must find
out where they were), attended courses in yoga (she had heard
of that), and had obviously read widely in the subject, for she
kept quoting other authors, but she had failed to learn what
was essential. Sex wasn’t theories, incense, erogenous zones,
bows and salaams. How did that person (a woman) have the
nerve to write on a subject which not even Maria, who worked
in the field, knew in depth. Perhaps it was all the fault of the
Himalayas or the need to complicate something whose very
beauty lay in simplicity and passion. If that woman could get
away with publishing and selling such a stupid book, perhaps
she should think seriously again about writing her own: Eleven
Minutes. It wouldn’t be cynical or false—it would just be her
story.
But she had neither the time nor the interest; she needed to
focus her energies on making Ralf Hart happy and on learning
how to manage a farm.
From Maria’s diary, just after abandoning the boring book:
I’ve met a man and fallen in love with him. I allowed myself to
fall in love for one simple reason: I’m not expecting anything
to come of it. I know that, in three months’ time, I’ll be far
away and he’ll be just a memory, but I couldn’t stand living
without love any longer; I had reached my limit.
I’m writing a story for Ralf Hart—that’s his name. I’m not
sure he’ll come back to the club where I work, but, for the first
time in my life, that doesn’t matter. It’s enough just to love him,
to be with him in my thoughts and to color this lovely city with
his steps, his words, his love. When I leave this country, it will
have a face and a name and the memory of a fireplace.
Everything else I experienced here, all the difficulties I had to
overcome, will be as nothing compared to that memory.
I would like to do for him what he did for me. I’ve been
thinking about it a lot, and I realize that I didn’t go into that
café by chance; really important meetings are planned by the
souls long before the bodies see each other.
Generally speaking, these meetings occur when we reach a
limit, when we need to die and be reborn emotionally. These
meetings are waiting for us, but more often than not, we avoid
them happening. If we are desperate, though, if we have
nothing to lose, or if we are full of enthusiasm for life, then the
unknown reveals itself, and our universe changes direction.
Everyone knows how to love, because we are all born with
that gift. Some people have a natural talent for it, but the
majority of us have to re-learn, to remember how to love, and
everyone, without exception, needs to burn on the bonfire of
past emotions, to relive certain joys and griefs, certain ups and
downs, until they can see the connecting thread that exists
behind each new encounter; because there is a connecting
thread.
And then, our bodies learn to speak the language of the
soul, known as sex, and that is what I can give to the man who
gave me back my soul, even though he has no idea how
important he is to my life. That is what he asked me for and
that is what he will have; I want him to be very happy.
Sometimes life is very mean: a person can spend days, weeks,
months and years without feeling anything new. Then, when a
door opens—as happened with Maria when she met Ralf Hart
—a positive avalanche pours in. One moment, you have
nothing, the next, you have more than you can cope with.
Two hours after writing her diary, when she arrived at work,
Milan, the owner, came looking for her:
“So you went out with that painter, did you?”
Ralf was obviously known at the club—she had realized
this when he paid the rate for three customers, without having
to ask the price. Maria merely nodded, trying to act
mysterious, but Milan took no notice; he knew this life better
than she did.
“Perhaps you’re ready for the next stage. There’s a special
client of ours who has often asked about you. I told him that
you’re not experienced enough, and he believed me, but
perhaps now is the moment to try.”
A special client?
“What’s this got to do with the painter?”
“He’s a special client too.”
So everything she had done with Ralf Hart had already
been done by one of her colleagues. She bit her lip and said
nothing; she had had a lovely week, and she must not forget
what she had written.
“Should I do the same thing I did with him?”
“I don’t know what you did; but tonight, if someone offers
you a drink, say no. Special clients pay more; you won’t regret
it.”
Work started as it always did. The Thai women all sat
together, the Colombians adopted their usual air of knowing
everything, the three Brazilians (including her) looked
absently about them, as if nothing could ever surprise or
interest them. Apart from them, there was an Austrian, two
Germans, and the rest were tall, pretty women with pale eyes
who came from the former Eastern Bloc countries and who
always seemed to find husbands more quickly than the others.
The men began to arrive—Russian, Swiss, German, all of
them busy executives, well able to afford the services of the
most expensive prostitutes in one of the most expensive cities
in the world. Some came over to her table, but she kept her eye
on Milan, who shook his head. Maria was pleased; tonight, she
wouldn’t have to open her legs, put up with smells or take
showers in sometimes chilly bathrooms; all she had to do was
to teach a man grown weary of sex how to make love. And
when she thought about it, not every woman would have been
creative enough to come up with that story about the exchange
of gifts.
At the same time, she was wondering: Why is it that,
having experienced everything, these men want to go right
back to the start? Not that this was her concern; as long as they
paid well, she was there to serve them.
A man came in, younger than Ralf Hart; he was goodlooking, with dark hair, perfect teeth, and wearing what looked
like a Mao jacket—no tie, just a high collar and, underneath,
an impeccable white shirt. He went up to the bar, where both
he and Milan turned to look at Maria; then he came over.
“Would you like a drink?”
She saw Milan nod, and so invited the man to sit down at
her table. She ordered a fruit juice cocktail and waited for him
to ask her to dance. Then the man introduced himself:
“My name is Terence, and I work for a record company in
England. Since I assume I’m in a place where I can trust the
personnel, I take it this will remain entirely between you and
me.”
Maria was about to start talking about Brazil, but he
interrupted her:
“Milan says you understand what I want.”
“I’ve no idea what you want, but I know my job.”
They did not follow the usual ritual; he paid the bill, took
her arm and they got into a taxi, where he gave her a thousand
francs. For a moment, she remembered the Arab man with
whom she had gone to the restaurant full of famous paintings;
it was the first time she had received the same amount of
money, and instead of making her feel glad, it made her feel
nervous.
The taxi stopped outside one of the most expensive hotels
in the city. The man greeted the porter and seemed totally at
ease in the place. They went straight up to his room, a suite
with a view over the river. He opened a bottle of wine—
possibly a rare vintage—and offered her a glass.
Maria watched him while he drank; what did a rich, goodlooking man like him want with a prostitute? Since he barely
spoke, she too remained largely silent, trying to work out what
would make a special client happy. She knew that she should
not take the initiative, but once the process had begun, she
needed to be able to follow his lead as quickly as possible;
after all, it wasn’t every night that she earned a thousand
francs.
“We’ve got plenty of time,” Terence said. “All the time in
the world. You can sleep here if you like.”
Her feelings of insecurity returned. The man did not seem
in the least intimidated, and, unlike her other customers, he
spoke very calmly. He knew what he wanted; he put on the
perfect piece of music, at the perfect volume, in the perfect
room, with the perfect window, which looked out onto the lake
of a perfect city. His suit was well-tailored, his suitcase was
there in the corner, very small, as if he always travelled light,
or as if he had come to Geneva just for that one night.
“I’ll sleep at home,” Maria said.
The man opposite her changed completely. An icy glint
came into his hitherto gentlemanly eyes.
“Sit there,” he said, indicating a chair by the desk.
It was an order! A real order. Maria obeyed and, oddly
enough, she felt excited.
“Sit properly. Back straight, like a lady. If you don’t, I’ll
punish you.”
Punish her! Special client! In a flash, she understood
everything, took the thousand francs out of her bag and put it
down on the desk.
“I know what you want,” she said, looking deep into those
cold, blue eyes. “And I won’t do it.”
The man seemed to return to his normal self and he could
see that she was telling the truth.
“Have a drink of wine,” he said. “I won’t force you to do
anything. You can either stay a little longer, if you like, or you
can leave.”
That made her feel better.
“I have a job. I have a boss who protects and trusts me. I’d
be grateful if you didn’t say anything to him.”
Maria said this without a hint of pleading or self-pity in her
voice; it was simply how things were.
Terence was once again the man she had first met—neither
gentle nor harsh, just someone who, unlike her other clients,
gave the impression that he knew what he wanted. He seemed
to emerge from a trance, from a play that had scarcely begun.
Was it worth leaving now and never finding out the truth
about this “special client”?
“What exactly did you want?”
“You know what I want. Pain. Suffering. And a great deal
of pleasure.”
“Pain and suffering don’t normally go with pleasure,” Maria
thought. And yet she desperately wanted to believe that they
did, and thus make a positive out of her many negative
experiences.
He took her by the hand and led her over to the window: on
the other side of the lake they could see a cathedral spire.
Maria remembered passing it when she had walked the road to
Santiago with Ralf Hart.
“You see the river, the lake, the houses and the church?
Well, it was all pretty much the same five hundred years ago,
except that the city was deserted. A strange disease had spread
throughout Europe, and no one knew why so many people
were dying. They began to call the disease the Black Death—
sent by God because of mankind’s sins.
“Then a group of people decided to sacrifice themselves for
the sake of humanity. They offered the thing they most feared:
physical pain. They began to spend days and nights walking
across these bridges, along these streets, beating their own
bodies with whips and chains. They were suffering in the
name of God and praising God with their pain. They soon
realized that they were happier doing this than baking bread,
working in the fields or feeding their animals. Pain was no
longer a cause of suffering, but a source of pleasure because
they were redeeming humanity from its sins. Pain became joy,
the meaning of life, pleasure.”
His eyes grew cold again. He picked up the money she had
put down on the desk, separated out one hundred and fifty
francs and put those in her bag.
“Don’t worry about your boss. Here’s his commission, and
I promise I won’t say anything. You can leave now.”
She grabbed the money back.
“No!”
It was the wine, the Arab man in the restaurant, the woman
with the sad smile, the idea that she would never ever return to
this wretched place, the fear of a new love that was coming to
her in the shape of a man, the letters to her mother telling of a
wonderful life full of job opportunities, the boy from her
childhood who had asked her for a pencil, the struggles with
herself, the guilt, the curiosity, the money, the search to
discover her own limits, and all the missed chances and
opportunities. Another Maria was there now: she was no
longer offering gifts, she was offering herself up as a sacrifice.
“I’m not afraid anymore. Let’s carry on. If necessary, you
can punish me for my rebelliousness. I’ve lied and betrayed
and maligned the very person who protected and loved me.”
She was entering into the spirit of the game. She was
saying the right things.
“Kneel down!” said Terence in a low, chilling voice.
Maria obeyed. She had never been treated this way, and she
didn’t know if it was good or bad, only that she wanted to go
forward; she deserved to be humiliated for all she had done in
her life. She was entering a role, becoming a different person,
a woman she did not know at all.
“You will be punished because you are useless, because
you don’t know the rules and because you know nothing about
sex, life or love.”
While he was speaking, Terence was transformed into two
very different men. The one who was calmly explaining the
rules to her and the one who made her feel like the most
miserable wretch in the world.
“Do you know why I am doing this? Because there is no
greater pleasure than that of initiating someone into an
unknown world. Taking someone’s virginity—the virginity not
of their body, but of their soul, you understand.”
She understood.
“Today you can ask questions, but the next time, when the
theater curtain goes up, the play will begin and cannot be
stopped. If it does stop, it is because our souls are
incompatible. Remember: it is a play. You must be the person
you have never had the courage to be. Gradually, you will
discover that you are that person, but until you can see this
clearly, you must pretend and invent.”
“What if I can’t stand the pain?”
“There is no pain, only something that transforms itself into
delight and mystery. It forms part of the play to say: ‘Don’t
treat me like that, you’re really hurting me.’ As is: ‘Stop, I
can’t take anymore!’ In order to avoid danger….” He broke
off at this point and said: “Keep your head down; don’t look at
me!”
Maria, kneeling, lowered her head and stared at the floor.
“…in order to avoid this relationship causing any serious
physical harm, we have two code words. If one of us says
‘yellow,’ that means that the violence should be decreased
slightly. If one of us says ‘red,’ it must be stopped at once.”
“You said ‘one of us’…”
“We take turns. One cannot exist without the other; no one
can know how to humiliate another person if they themselves
have not experienced humiliation.”
These were terrible words, from a world she did not know,
full of shadow, slime and putrefaction. Nevertheless, she
wanted to go on—her body was trembling with fear and
excitement.
Terence placed his hand on her head with unexpected
tenderness.
“That’s all.”
He asked her to get up, not particularly kindly, but not with
the same brusque aggression he had shown before. Still
trembling, Maria put on her jacket. Terence noticed the state
she was in.
“Have a cigarette before you go.”
“Nothing happened.”
“It doesn’t need to. It will start to happen in your soul, and
the next time we meet, you will be ready.”
“Was tonight worth one thousand francs?”
He didn’t reply. He too lit a cigarette and they finished the
wine, listening to the perfect music, savoring the silence
together, until the moment came to say something, and when it
did, Maria was surprised by her own words.
“I don’t understand why I want to step into this slime.”
“One thousand francs.”
“No, that’s not the reason.”
Terence seemed pleased with this response.
“I’ve asked myself the same thing. The Marquis de Sade
said that the most important experiences a man can have are
those that take him to the very limit; that is the only way we
learn, because it requires all our courage. When a boss
humiliates an employee, or a man humiliates his wife, he is
merely being cowardly or taking his revenge on life, they are
people who have never dared to look into the depths of their
soul, never attempted to know the origin of that desire to
unleash the wild beast, or to understand that sex, pain and love
are all extreme experiences.
“Only those who know those frontiers know life;
everything else is just passing the time, repeating the same
tasks, growing old and dying without ever having discovered
what we are doing here.”
In the street again, in the cold again, and again that desire to
walk. The man was wrong, it wasn’t necessary to know your
own demons in order to find God. She passed a group of
students coming out of a bar; they were all happy and slightly
tipsy, they were all good-looking and bursting with health;
soon they would finish university and start what people call
“real life.” Work, marriage, children, television, bitterness, old
age, the sense of having lost many things, frustrations, illness,
disability, dependence on others, loneliness, death.
What was happening? She too was looking for the peace in
which to live her “real life”; the time spent in Switzerland,
doing something she had never dreamed of doing, was just a
difficult phase, the kind of thing everyone goes through at
some time or another. During this difficult phase, she
frequented the Copacabana, went with men for money, played
the Innocent Girl, the Femme Fatale and the Understanding
Mother, depending on the client. But it was just a job, which
she did with total professionalism—for the sake of the tips—
and minimum interest—for fear she might get used to it. She
had spent the last nine months controlling the world around
her, and shortly before she was due to go back to her own
country, she was finding that she was capable of loving
without demanding anything in return and of suffering for no
reason. It was as if life had chosen this strange, sordid way of
teaching her something about her own mysteries, her light and
her darkness.
From Maria’s diary on the night following her first meeting
with Terence:
He quoted the Marquis de Sade, of whom I know nothing,
apart from the word “sadism.” It’s true that we only know
each other when we come up against our own limits, but it’s
wrong too, because it isn’t necessary to know everything about
ourselves; human beings weren’t made solely to go in search
of wisdom, but also to plough the land, wait for rain, plant the
wheat, harvest the grain, make the bread.
I am two women: one wants to have all the joy, passion and
adventure that life can give me. The other wants to be a slave
to routine, to family life, to the things that can be planned and
achieved. I’m a housewife and a prostitute, both of us living in
the same body and doing battle with each other.
The meeting of these two women is a game with serious
risks. A divine dance. When we meet, we are two divine
energies, two universes colliding. If the meeting is not carried
out with due reverence, one universe destroys the other.
She was back in Ralf Hart’s living room, with the fire, the
bottle of wine, the two of them sitting on the floor, and
everything she had experienced the previous night with the
English executive just a dream or a nightmare—depending on
how she was feeling. Now she was searching once more for
her reason for living, or, rather, for the kind of utter surrender
by which a person offers his or her heart and asks for nothing
in return.
She had grown a lot while waiting for this moment. She
had finally discovered that real love has nothing to do with
what she imagined, that is, with a chain of events provoked by
the energy engendered by love—courtship, engagement,
marriage, children, waiting, cooking, the amusement park on
Sundays, more waiting, getting old together, an end to the
waiting, and then, in its place, comes your husband’s
retirement, illnesses, the feeling that it is far too late to live out
your dream together.
She looked at the man to whom she had decided to give
herself, and to whom she had resolved never to reveal her
feelings, because what she was feeling now was far from
taking any definite form, not even physical form. He seemed
more at ease, as if he were embarking on an interesting period
of his life. He was smiling and telling her about his recent visit
to Munich to meet an important museum director.
“He asked if the painting about the faces of Geneva was
ready yet. I said I had just met one of the principal people I
would like to paint, a woman who was full of light. But I don’t
want to talk about me, I want to embrace you. I desire you.”
Desire. Desire? Desire! That was the point of departure this
evening, because it was something she knew extremely well!
For example, you awaken desire by not immediately
handing over the object of that desire.
“All right, then, desire me. That’s what we’re doing right
now. You are less than a yard away from me, you went to a
nightclub, paid for my services, and you know you have the
right to touch me. But you don’t dare. Look at me. Look at me
and imagine that perhaps I don’t want you to look at me.
Imagine what’s hidden beneath my clothes.”
She always wore black to work, and she couldn’t
understand why the other girls at the Copacabana tried to look
provocative in their low-cut dresses and garish colors. It
seemed to her that it was more exciting for a man if she
dressed like any other woman he might meet at the office, on
the train or in the house of one of his wife’s friends.
Ralf looked at her. Maria felt him undressing her and she
enjoyed being desired like that—with no contact, as if she
were in a restaurant or standing in a queue at the cinema.
“We’re in a train station,” Maria went on. “I’m standing
next to you, waiting for a train, but you don’t know me. My
eyes meet yours, by chance, and I don’t look away. You don’t
know what I’m trying to say, because, although you’re an
intelligent man, capable of seeing the ‘light’ in other people,
you are not sensitive enough to see what that light is
illuminating.”
She had learned about “theater.” She had wanted to forget
the face of that English executive as quickly as possible, but
there he was, guiding her imagination.
“My eyes are fixed on yours, and I might be wondering to
myself: ‘Do I know him from somewhere?’ Or I might just be
distracted. Or I might be afraid of appearing unfriendly;
perhaps you do know me, and so I give you the benefit of the
doubt for a few seconds, until it becomes clear either that you
really do know me or that it’s a case of mistaken identity.
“But I might also be wanting the simplest thing in the
world: to find a man. I might be trying to escape an unhappy
love affair. I might be hoping to avenge myself for a recent
betrayal and have gone to the train station looking for a
stranger. I might want to be your prostitute just for one night,
to do something different in my otherwise boring life. I might
even be a real prostitute on the look-out for work.”
A brief silence; Maria had grown distracted. She was back
in that hotel room, remembering the humiliation—“yellow,”
“red,” pain and a great deal of pleasure. That encounter had
stirred her soul in a way she did not like at all.
Ralf noticed and tried to take her back to the train station.
“In this meeting, do you desire me too?”
“I don’t know. We don’t talk. You don’t know.”
She grows distracted again. The “theater” idea is proving
really very helpful; it draws out the real person and drives
away the many false people who live inside us.
“The fact is that I don’t look away, and you don’t know
what to do. Should you approach? Will you be rejected? Will I
call the guard? Or invite you for a coffee perhaps?”
“I’m on my way back from Munich,” Ralf Hart said, and
his voice sounds different, as if they really were meeting for
the first time. “I’m thinking about a collection of paintings on
the many personalities of sex, the many masks that people
wear in order never to experience a real encounter.”
He knew about the “theater.” Milan had said that he too
was a “special client.” An alarm bell rang, but she needed time
to think.
“The director of the museum said to me: What are you
going to base your work on? I said: On women who feel free
enough to earn their living making love. He said: That won’t
work; we call such women ‘prostitutes.’ I said: Fine, they are
prostitutes; I’m going to study their history and create
something more intellectual, more to the taste of the families
who visit your museum. It’s all a question of culture, you see.
Of finding a palatable way of presenting something that is
otherwise very hard to take.
“The director insisted: But sex is no longer a taboo. It’s
been so over-exploited that it’s difficult to produce any new
work on the subject. I said: Do you know where sexual desire
comes from? From our instinct, said the director. Yes, I said,
from our instinct, but everyone knows that. How can you
make a beautiful exhibition if all we are talking about is
science? I want to talk about how man explains that attraction,
the way, let’s say, a philosopher would explain it. The director
asked me to give him an example. I said that if, when I caught
the train back home, a woman looked at me, I would go over
and speak to her; I would say that, since we were strangers, we
had the freedom to do anything we wanted, to live out all our
fantasies, and then go home to our wife or husband and never
meet again. And then, in the train station, I see you.”
“Your story is so interesting it’s in danger of killing desire.”
Ralf Hart laughed and agreed. They had finished one bottle
of wine and he went into the kitchen to fetch another; and she
sat staring into the fire, knowing what the next step would be,
but, at the same time, savoring the cozy atmosphere, forgetting
about the English executive, and regaining that sense of
surrender.
Ralf filled their two glasses, and Maria said:
“Just out of curiosity, how would you end that story with
the museum director?”
“Since I was in the company of an intellectual, I would
quote from Plato. According to him, at the beginning of
creation, men and women were not as they are now; there was
just one being, who was rather short, with a body and a neck,
but his head had two faces, looking in different directions. It
was as if two creatures had been glued back to back, with two
sets of sex organs, four legs and four arms.
“The Greek gods, however, were jealous, because this
creature with four arms could work harder; with its two faces,
it was always vigilant and could not be taken by surprise; and
its four legs meant that it could stand or walk for long periods
at a time without tiring. Even more dangerous was the fact that
the creature had two different sets of sex organs and so needed
no one else in order to continue reproducing.
“Zeus, the supreme lord of Olympus, said: ‘I have a plan to
make these mortals lose some of their strength.’
“And he cut the creature in two with a lightning bolt, thus
creating man and woman. This greatly increased the
population of the world, and, at the same time, disoriented and
weakened its inhabitants, because now they had to search for
their lost half and embrace it and, in that embrace, regain their
former strength, their ability to avoid betrayal and the stamina
to walk for long periods of time and to withstand hard work.
That embrace in which the two bodies re-fuse to become one
again is what we call sex.”
“Is that a true story?”
“According to the Greek philosopher, Plato, yes.”
Maria was gazing at him, fascinated, and the experience of
the previous night had vanished completely. She saw that the
man before her was full of the same “light” that he had seen in
her, entirely involved in telling her that strange story, his eyes
alight now not with desire but with joy.
“Can I ask you a favor?”
Ralf said she could ask anything she wanted.
“Is it possible to know why, after the gods had split the
four-legged creature in two, some of them decided that the
embrace could be merely a thing, just another business
transaction, which instead of increasing people’s energy,
diminished it?”
“You mean prostitution?”
“Yes. Could you find out if, in the beginning, sex was
something sacred?”
“If you like,” replied Ralf, “although it’s not something
I’ve ever thought about, nor, as far as I know, has anyone else.
Perhaps there isn’t any literature on the subject.”
Maria could stand the pressure no longer:
“Has it ever occurred to you that women, in particular,
prostitutes, are capable of love?”
“Yes, it has. It occurred to me on that first day, when we
were sitting in the café and I saw your light. Then, when I
decided to offer you a cup of coffee, I chose to believe in
everything, even in the possibility of you returning me to the
world I left a long, long time ago.”
There was no going back now. Maria, the teacher, needed
to rush to her own aid, otherwise she would kiss him, embrace
him and ask him never to leave her.
“Let’s go back to the train station,” she said. “Or, rather,
let’s come back to this room, to the day when we sat here
together for the first time and you recognized that I existed and
gave me a gift. That was your first attempt to enter my soul,
and you weren’t sure whether or not you were welcome. But,
as you say in your story, human beings were once divided and
now seek the embrace that will reunite them. That is our
instinct. But it is also our reason for putting up with all the
difficulties we meet in that search.
“I want you to look at me, but I want you to take care that I
don’t notice. Initial desire is important because it is hidden,
forbidden, not permitted. You don’t know whether you are
looking at your lost half or not; she doesn’t know either, but
something is drawing you together, and you must believe that
it is true you are each other’s ‘other half.’”
Where am I getting all this? I’m drawing it up from the
bottom of my heart, because this is how I always wanted it to
be. I’m drawing up these dreams from my own dream as a
woman.
She slipped off the shoulder strap of her dress, so that one
part, one tiny part of one nipple was exposed.
“Desire is not what you see, but what you imagine.”
Ralf Hart was looking at a woman with dark hair and wearing
dark clothes, who was sitting on the floor of his living room,
and was full of absurd desires, like having an open fire
burning in the middle of summer. Yes, he would like to
imagine what those clothes were hiding; he could guess the
size of her breasts, and he knew that she didn’t really need the
bra she was wearing, although perhaps she had to wear it for
her work. Her breasts were neither large nor small, they were
simply young. Her eyes gave nothing away; what was she
doing here? Why was he encouraging this absurd, dangerous
relationship, when he had no problems finding women? He
was rich, young, famous, good-looking. He loved his work; he
had loved women whom he had subsequently married; he had
been loved. He was someone who, according to all the rules
and norms, should have been able to shout out loud: “I’m
happy.”
But he wasn’t. While most of humanity was scrabbling for a
piece of bread, a roof over their head and a job that would
allow them to live with dignity, Ralf Hart had all of that, and it
only made him feel more wretched. If he looked back on what
his life had been lately, he had perhaps managed two or three
days when he had woken up, looked at the sun—or the rain—
and felt glad to see the morning, just happy, without wanting
anything, planning anything or asking anything in exchange.
Apart from those few days, the rest of his existence had been
wasted on dreams, both frustrated and realized—a desire to go
beyond himself, to go beyond his limitations; he had spent his
life trying to prove something, but he didn’t know what or to
whom.
He looked at the beautiful woman before him, who was
discreetly dressed in black, someone he had met by chance,
although he had seen her before at the nightclub and thought
that she seemed out of place. She had asked him to desire her,
and he desired her intensely, far more than she could imagine,
but it wasn’t her breasts or her body, it was her company he
desired. He wanted to put his arms around her and to sit in
silence, staring into the fire, drinking wine, smoking the
occasional cigarette; that would be enough. Life was made up
of simple things; he was weary of all the years he had spent
searching for something, though quite what he didn’t know.
And yet, if he did that, if he touched her, all would be lost.
For, despite the “light” he could see in Maria, he wasn’t sure
she realized how good it was for him to be by her side. Was he
paying? Yes, and he would continue paying for as long as it
took to win her, to sit with her by the lakeside and speak of
love, and to hear her say the same thing. It was best not to take
any chances, not to rush things, not to say anything.
Ralf Hart stopped tormenting himself and concentrated once
more on the game they had just created together. The woman
before him was right; the wine, the fire, the cigarettes and the
company were not enough in themselves; another kind of
intoxication, another kind of flame was required.
She was wearing a dress with shoulder straps; she was
revealing one breast; he could see her skin, more dark than
pale. He desired her. He desired her intensely.
Maria noticed the change in Ralf’s eyes. Knowing that she was
desired excited her more than anything else. It had nothing to
do with the automatic formula—I want to make love with you,
I want to get married, I want you to have an orgasm, I want
you to have my child, I want commitment. No, desire was an
entirely free sensation, loose in the air, vibrating, filling life
with the will to have something—and that was enough, that
will carried all before it, moved mountains, made her wet.
Desire was the source of everything else—leaving her
country, discovering a new world, learning French,
overcoming her prejudices, dreaming of having a farm, loving
without asking for anything in return, feeling that she was a
woman simply because a man was looking at her. With
calculated slowness, she slipped off the other strap, and the
dress slid down her body. Then she undid her bra. There she
was, with the upper part of her body completely bare,
wondering if he would leap on her, touch her, utter vows of
love, or if he was sensitive enough simply to feel sexual
pleasure in desire itself.
Things around them began to change, all sound
disappeared, the fire, the paintings and the books gradually
vanished, to be replaced by a kind of trance-like state, in
which only the object of desire exists, and nothing else is
important.
The man did not move. At first, she felt a certain shyness in
his eyes, but that did not last long. He was looking at her, and
in the world of his imagination, he was caressing her with his
tongue, they were making love, sweating, clinging to each
other, mingling tenderness and violence, calling out and
moaning together.
In the real world, though, they said nothing, neither of them
moved, and that made her even more excited, because she too
was free to think what she liked. She was asking him to touch
her gently, she was opening her legs, she was masturbating in
front of him, saying the most romantic things and the lewdest
things, as if they were one and the same; she had several
orgasms, waking the neighbors, waking the whole world with
her cries. Here was her man, who was giving her pleasure and
joy, with whom she could be the person she really was, with
whom she could talk about her sexual problems, and tell him
how much she would like to stay with him for the rest of the
night, for the rest of the week, for the rest of her life.
Beads of sweat began to appear on their foreheads. It was
the heat from the fire, one said mentally to the other. But both
the man and the woman in that room had reached their limit,
exhausted their imagination, experienced together an eternity
of good moments. They needed to stop, because if they took
one more step, the magic would be undone by reality.
Very slowly, because endings are always more difficult
than beginnings, she put on her bra and hid her breasts. The
universe returned to its normal place, the things around them
re-emerged, she pulled up the dress that had fallen about her
waist, smiled and very gently touched his face. He took her
hand and pressed it to his cheek, not knowing for how long he
should hold it there, or how tightly.
She wanted to tell him that she loved him. But that would
spoil everything, it might frighten him or, worse, might make
him say that he loved her too. Maria didn’t want that: the
freedom of her love depended on asking nothing and expecting
nothing.
“Anyone capable of feeling knows that it is possible to
experience pleasure before even touching the other person.
The words, the looks, all contain the secret of the dance. But
the train has arrived, we each go our separate ways. I hope to
be able to join you on this journey to…where?”
“Back to Geneva,” replied Ralf.
“Anyone who is observant, who discovers the person they
have always dreamed of, knows that sexual energy comes into
play before sex even takes place. The greatest pleasure isn’t
sex, but the passion with which it is practiced. When the
passion is intense, then sex joins in to complete the dance, but
it is never the principal aim.”
“You’re talking about love like a teacher.”
Maria went on talking, because this was her defense, her
way of saying everything without committing herself to
anything.
“Anyone who is in love is making love the whole time,
even when they’re not. When two bodies meet, it is just the
cup overflowing. They can stay together for hours, even days.
They begin the dance one day and finish it the next, or—such
is the pleasure they experience—they may never finish it. No
eleven minutes for them.”
“What?”
“I love you.”
“I love you too.”
“I’m sorry, I don’t know what I’m saying.”
“Nor do I.”
She got up, kissed him and left. This time she opened the
front door herself, since, according to the Brazilian
superstition, the owner of the house only has to open the door
on the first occasion that a guest leaves.
From Maria’s diary, written the next morning:
Last night, when Ralf Hart looked at me, he opened a door, as
if he were a thief; but when he left, he took nothing from me,
on the contrary, he left behind him the scent of roses—he
wasn’t a thief, he was a bridegroom visiting me.
Every human being experiences his or her own desire; it is
part of our personal treasure and, although, as an emotion, it
can drive people away, generally speaking, it brings those who
are important to us closer. It is an emotion chosen by my soul,
and it is so intense that it can infect everything and everyone
around me.
Each day I choose the truth by which I try to live. I try to be
practical, efficient, professional. But I would like to be able
always to choose desire as my companion. Not out of
obligation, not to lessen my loneliness, but because it is good.
Yes, very good.
On average, thirty-eight women worked at the Copacabana on
a regular basis, but only one of them, the Filipino, Nyah, was
what Maria would consider a friend. Women stayed there an
average of six months minimum and three years maximum,
because they would either get a proposal of marriage, be set up
as a mistress, or no longer pull in the clients, in which case,
Milan would delicately ask them to find somewhere else to
work.
That is why it was important to respect each other’s
clientele and never try to seduce men who always headed for a
particular girl as soon as they came in. Apart from being
dishonest, it could also be very dangerous. The previous week,
a Colombian woman had quietly taken a cut-throat razor out of
her pocket, placed it on the glass being used by one of the
Yugoslav girls, and said, in the calmest of voices, that she
would mark her face if she persisted in giving in to the
advances of a certain bank manager who was a regular
customer. The Yugoslav said that the man was a free agent and
that, if he chose her, she couldn’t really say no.
That night, the man came in, greeted the Colombian
woman, but went over to the Yugoslav’s table. They had a
drink, danced and the Yugoslav winked at the Colombian (a
provocation too far in Maria’s view), as if saying: “See? He
chose me!”
But that wink contained many unspoken things: he chose
me because I’m prettier, because I went with him last week
and he enjoyed it, because I’m young. The Colombian said
nothing. When the Yugoslav came back, two hours later, the
Colombian sat down beside her, took the razor out of her
pocket and made a cut on the Yugoslav’s face, near her ear. It
wasn’t a deep cut, and it wasn’t dangerous, but it was enough
to leave a small scar to remind her of that night. The two
started fighting, blood spurted everywhere and the frightened
customers fled.
When the police arrived, wanting to know what was going
on, the Yugoslav said that she had cut her face on a glass that
had fallen from a shelf (there are no shelves in the
Copacabana). This was the law of silence, or what Italian
prostitutes like to call omertà: any problem to be resolved in
Rue de Berne, from love to death, would be resolved, but
without the interference of the law. They made their own laws
there.
The police knew about the omertà and could see that the
woman was lying, but they didn’t insist—arresting someone,
trying them and then keeping them in prison would cost the
Swiss taxpayer far too much money. Milan thanked the police
for their prompt response, but, he said, it was all a
misunderstanding or else a rival nightclub owner trying to
make trouble.
As soon as they left, he asked the two women not to come
back to his club. After all, the Copacabana was a family place
(a statement Maria found hard to grasp) and had a reputation
to keep up (this left her still more intrigued). There were no
fights there, because the first law was to respect another
woman’s client.
The second law was total discretion, “just like a Swiss
bank,” he said. This was largely because, there, the women
could trust the clients, who were selected much as a bank
selects its clients, based on the state of their current account
and on personal references. Mistakes were occasionally made;
there were a few rare cases of non-payment, of girls being
threatened or roughed up, but in the many years he had spent
struggling to create and develop his club’s reputation, Milan
had become an expert at recognizing who should or shouldn’t
be invited in. None of the women knew exactly what these
criteria were, but they had often seen some well-dressed man
being told that the club was full that night (even though it was
empty) and that it would be full the following nights too (i.e.
please don’t come back). They had also seen unshaven men
dressed in casual clothes being enthusiastically invited by
Milan to a glass of champagne. The owner of the Copacabana
did not judge by appearances, and he was always right.
It was a good working relationship, and seemed to suit all
parties involved. The great majority of the clientele were
married, or held important positions in some company or
other. Some of the women who worked there were also
married and had children and went to parents’ evenings at
their children’s schools, but knew that they ran no risk of
being exposed; if one of the other parents turned up at the
Copacabana, they would be compromised too and so could say
nothing: that is how omertà worked.
There was comradeship amongst the women, but not
friendship; no one talked much about their lives. In the few
conversations she had had, Maria found no bitterness, guilt or
sadness amongst her colleagues, only a kind of resignation,
and a strangely defiant glint in the eye, as if they were proud
of the way they confronted the world, independently and
confidently. After a week, any new arrival was considered a
“fellow professional” and received instructions always to help
keep marriages intact (a prostitute cannot be seen as a threat to
the stability of the home), never to accept invitations to meet
outside working hours, to listen to confessions without
offering an opinion, to moan at the moment of climax (Maria
learned that everyone did this, but that they hadn’t told her on
her very first day because it was one of the tricks of the trade),
to say hello to the police in the street, to keep her work permit
up to date as well as any health checks, and, finally, not to
probe too deeply into the moral or legal aspects of what she
was doing; they were what they were, and that was that.
Before it got busy, Maria could always be seen with a book
in her hand, and she soon became known as the intellectual of
the group. At first, they wanted to know if she was reading a
love story, but when they saw that the books were about dryas-dust subjects like economics, psychology and—recently—
farm management, they left her alone to continue her
researches and her note-taking in peace.
Because she had a lot of regular clients and because she went
to the Copacabana every night, even when it wasn’t busy,
Maria earned both Milan’s confidence and her colleagues’
envy; they said she was ambitious, arrogant and thought only
about earning money—the last bit was true, but she felt like
asking if they weren’t all there for the very same reason.
Anyway, remarks like that never killed anyone—they were
part of the life of any successful person, and it was best to get
used to them, rather than let herself be diverted from her two
goals: going back to Brazil on the chosen date and buying a
farm.
Ralf Hart was in her thoughts from morning to night now,
and for the first time she was able to feel happy with an absent
love—although she slightly regretted having confessed her
love, thus running the risk of losing everything. But what had
she got to lose, if she was asking for nothing in exchange? She
remembered how her heart had beat faster when Milan
mentioned that Ralf was—or had been—a special client. What
did that mean? She felt betrayed and jealous.
It was normal to feel jealous, although life had taught her
that it was pointless thinking you could own another person—
anyone who believes that is just deceiving themselves. Despite
this, she could not stop herself having these feelings of
jealousy, or of having grand intellectual thoughts about it, or
even thinking it was a proof of fragility.
“The strongest love is the love that can demonstrate its
fragility. Anyway, if my love is real (and not just a way of
distracting myself, deceiving myself, and passing the time that
never seems to pass in this city), freedom will conquer
jealousy and any pain it causes me, since pain is also part of
the natural process. Anyone who practices sport knows this: if
you want to achieve your objectives, you have to be prepared
for a daily dose of pain or discomfort. At first, it’s unpleasant
and demotivating, but in time you come to realize that it’s part
of the process of feeling good, and the moment arrives when,
if you don’t feel pain, you have a sense that the exercises
aren’t having the desired effect.”
The danger lies in focusing on that pain, giving it a
particular person’s name, and keeping it always present in
your thoughts. Maria, thank God, had managed to free herself
from that.
Even so, she sometimes found herself wondering where he
was, why he didn’t come and see her, if he had found that
whole story about the train station and repressed desire stupid,
if he had gone away forever because she had confessed her
love for him.
To avoid beautiful thoughts turning into suffering, she
developed a method: when something positive to do with Ralf
Hart came into her head—and this could be the fire and the
wine, an idea she would like to discuss with him, or simply the
pleasurable longing involved in wanting to know when he
would come back—Maria would stop what she was doing,
smile up at the sky and give thanks for being alive and to be
expecting nothing from the man she loved.
On the other hand, if her heart began to complain about his
absence or about things she shouldn’t have said while they
were together, she would say to herself:
“Oh, so you want to think about that, do you? All right,
then, you do what you like, while I get on with more important
things.”
She would continue to read or, if she was out, she would
focus her attention on everything around her: colors, people,
sounds—especially sounds, the sound of her own footsteps, of
the pages turning, of cars, of fragments of conversations, and
the unfortunate thought would eventually go away. If it came
back five minutes later, she would repeat the process, until
those thoughts, finding themselves accepted but also gently
rejected, would stay away for quite considerable periods of
time.
One of these “negative thoughts” was the possibility of
never seeing him again. With a little practice and a great deal
of patience, she managed to transform this into a “positive
thought”: when she left, Geneva would have the face of a man
with old-fashioned long hair, a child-like smile and a grave
voice. If someone asked her, many years later, what the place
she had known in her youth was like, she could reply:
“Very beautiful, and capable of loving and being loved.”
From Maria’s diary, on a slack night at the Copacabana:
After all the time I’ve spent with the people who come here, I
have reached the conclusion that sex has come to be used as
some kind of drug: in order to escape reality, to forget about
problems, to relax. And like all drugs, this is a harmful and
destructive practice.
If a person wants to take drugs, in the form of sex or
whatever, that’s their problem; the consequences of their
actions will be better or worse depending on the choices they
make. But if we are talking in terms of making progress in life,
we must understand that “good enough” is very different from
“best.”
Contrary to what my clients think, sex cannot be practiced
at any time. We all have a clock inside us, and in order to
make love, the hands on both clocks have to be pointing to the
same hour at the same time. That doesn’t happen every day. If
you love another person, you don’t depend on the sex act in
order to feel good. Two people who live together and love each
other need to adjust the hands of their clocks, with patience
and perseverance, games and “theatrical representations,”
until they realize that making love is more than just an
encounter, it is a genital “embrace.”
Everything is important. If you live your life intensely, you
experience pleasure all the time and don’t feel the need for sex.
When you have sex, it’s out of a sense of abundance, because
the glass of wine is so full that it overflows naturally, because
it is inevitable, because you are responding to the call of life,
because at that moment, and only at that moment, you have
allowed yourself to lose control.
P.S. I have just re-read what I wrote. Good grief! I’m
getting way too intellectual!
Shortly after writing this, and when she was preparing for
another night as Understanding Mother or Innocent Girl, the
door of the Copacabana opened and in walked Terence, the
record company executive, one of the special clients.
Behind the bar, Milan seemed pleased: Maria had not
disappointed him. Maria remembered the words that
simultaneously said so much and so little: “pain, suffering, and
a great deal of pleasure.”
“I flew in from London especially to see you. I’ve been
thinking about you a lot.”
She smiled, trying not to look too encouraging. Again he
had failed to follow the ritual and hadn’t asked if she wanted a
drink, but just sat down at her table.
“When a teacher helps someone to discover something, the
teacher always learns something new too.”
“I know what you mean,” said Maria, thinking of Ralf Hart
and feeling irritated with herself for doing so. She was with
another client, and she must respect him and do what she
could to please him.
“Do you want to go ahead?”
A thousand francs. A hidden universe. Her boss watching
her. The certainty that she could stop whenever she chose. The
date set for her return to Brazil. The other man, who never
came to see her.
“Are you in a hurry?” Maria asked.
He said no. What was it she wanted?
“I’d like my usual drink and my usual dance, and some
respect for my profession.”
He hesitated for a moment, but it was all part of the theater,
dominating and being dominated. He bought her a drink and
danced with her, then ordered a taxi and gave her the money
while they drove across the city to the same hotel. They went
in, he greeted the Italian porter just as he had on the night they
first met, and they went up to the same suite with a view over
the river.
Terence got up and took out his lighter, and only then did
Maria notice that there were dozens of candles arranged
around the room. He started lighting them.
“What would you like to know? Why I’m like this?
Because, unless I’m very much mistaken, you really enjoyed
the other evening we spent together. Do you want to know
why you’re like this too?”
“I was just thinking that in Brazil we have a superstition
that you should never light more than three things with the
same match. You’re not respecting that superstition.”
He ignored her remark.
“You’re like me. You’re not here for the thousand francs,
but out of a sense of guilt and dependency, because of your
various complexes and insecurities. That is neither good nor
bad, it’s simply human nature.”
He picked up the remote control and changed channels
several times until he found the TV news and a report on
refugees trying to escape a war.
“Do you see that? Have you ever seen those programs in
which people discuss their personal problems in front of
everyone? Have you been to a newspaper kiosk and seen the
headlines? The world enjoys suffering and pain. There’s
sadism in the way we look at these things, and masochism in
our conclusion that we don’t need to know all this in order to
be happy, and yet we watch other people’s tragedies and
sometimes suffer along with them.”
He poured out two glasses of champagne, turned off the
television and continued lighting candles, in contravention of
the superstition Maria had mentioned.
“As I say, it’s the human condition. Ever since we were
expelled from paradise, we have either been suffering, making
other people suffer or watching the suffering of others. It’s
beyond our control.”
From outside came the sound of thunder and lightning; a
huge storm was approaching.
“But I can’t do it,” Maria said. “It seems ridiculous to me
pretending that you’re my master and I’m your slave. We
don’t need ‘theater’ to find suffering; life offers us more than
enough opportunities.”
Terence had just finished lighting the candles. He picked
one up and placed it in the middle of the table, then served
more champagne, and caviar. Maria was drinking quickly,
thinking about the one thousand francs in her bag, about this
stranger who both fascinated and frightened her, and about
how she could control her fear. She knew that, with this man,
no night would ever be the same as another; she could not
intimidate him in any way.
“Sit down.”
His voice alternated between being gentle and
authoritarian. Maria obeyed, and a wave of heat swept up her
body; that order was familiar, she felt more secure.
“It’s theater. I’ve got to get involved in the play.”
It was nice being ordered around. She didn’t have to think,
just obey. She asked for more champagne, and he brought
vodka; it went to one’s head more quickly, loosened one up,
and went better with the caviar.
He opened the bottle; Maria was more or less drinking
alone, while she listened to the thunder and lightning outside.
Everything was conspiring to make the moment perfect, as if
the energies of the skies and the earth were also showing their
violent side.
After a while, Terence took a small suitcase out of the
wardrobe and placed it on the bed.
“Don’t move.”
Maria sat motionless. He opened the suitcase and took out
two pairs of chrome metal handcuffs.
“Sit with your legs apart.”
She obeyed—impotent out of choice, submissive because
she wanted to be. She saw him looking between her legs, he
could see her black panties, her long stockings, her thighs, he
could imagine her pubic hair, her sex.
“Stand up!”
She leaped up from her chair. She found it hard to stand
straight and realized that she was drunker than she thought.
“Don’t look at me. Lower your head, respect your master!”
Before she could lower her head, she saw a slender whip
being removed from the suitcase, then cracking through the
air, as if it had a life of its own.
“Drink. Keep your head down, but drink.”
She drank another one, two, three glasses of vodka. This
wasn’t just theater now, it was reality: control was out of her
hands. She felt like an object, a mere instrument, and
incredible though it may seem, that feeling of submission gave
her a sense of complete freedom. She was no longer the
teacher, the one who instructs, consoles, listens to confessions,
the one who excites; before the awesome power of this man,
she was just a girl from the interior of Brazil.
“Take off your clothes.”
The order was delivered abruptly, without a flicker of
desire, and yet, nothing could have been more erotic. Keeping
her head down as a sign of reverence, Maria unbuttoned her
dress and let it slip to the floor.
“You’re not behaving yourself, you know.”
Again the whip cracked through the air.
“You need to be punished. How dare a girl your age
contradict me? You should be on your knees before me!”
Maria made as if to kneel down, but the whip brought her
up short; for the first time it touched her flesh—her buttocks.
It stung, but seemed to leave no mark.
“Did I tell you to kneel down?”
“No.”
The whip again flicked across her buttocks.
“Say, ‘No, sir!’”
Another stinging whiplash. For a fraction of a second, it
occurred to her that she could either stop this right now or else
choose to go through with it, not for the money, but because of
what he had said the first time—that you only know yourself
when you go beyond your limits.
And this was new, it was an Adventure, and she could
decide later on if she wanted to continue, but at that moment,
she had ceased to be the girl with just three aims in life, who
earned her living with her body, who had met a man who had
an open fire and interesting stories to tell. Here, she was no
one, and being no one meant that she could be everything she
had ever dreamed of.
“Take the rest of your clothes off. And walk up and down
so that I can see you.”
Once more she obeyed, keeping her head down, saying not
a word. The man who was watching her, still fully dressed and
utterly impassive, was not the same person who had chatted to
her on their way here from the club—he was a Ulysses who
had travelled from London, a Theseus come down from the
heavens, a kidnapper invading the safest city in the world, and
who had the coldest heart on earth. She removed her panties
and her bra, feeling at once defenseless and protected. The
whip cracked again, this time without touching her body.
“Keep your head down! You’re here to be humiliated, to
submit to my every desire, do you understand?”
“Yes, sir.”
He grabbed her arms and put the first pair of handcuffs on
her wrists.
“You’re going to get a good beating. Until you learn to
behave yourself.”
He slapped her bottom with the flat of his hand. Maria
cried out; this time it had hurt.
“Oh, so you’re complaining, are you? Well, I haven’t even
started yet.”
Before she could do anything, he had placed a leather gag
on her mouth. It didn’t stop her speaking, she could still say
“yellow” or “red,” but she felt now that it was her destiny to
allow this man to do whatever he wished with her, and there
was no way she could escape now. She was naked, gagged and
handcuffed, with vodka flowing in her veins rather than blood.
Another slap on her buttocks.
“Walk up and down!”
Maria started to walk, obeying his commands: “stop,” “turn
to the right,” “sit down,” “open your legs.” He slapped her
again and again, whether she deserved it or not, and she felt
the pain and felt the humiliation—which was more intense and
more potent than the pain—and she felt as if she were in
another world, in which nothing existed, and it was an almost
religious feeling: self-annihilation, subjection, and a complete
loss of any sense of Ego, desire or self-will. She was very wet
and very aroused, but unable to understand what was going on.
“Down on your knees again!”
Since she always kept her head down, as a sign of
obedience and humiliation, Maria could not see exactly what
was happening, but she noticed that in that other universe, on
that other planet, the man was breathing hard, worn out with
wielding the whip and spanking her hard on the buttocks,
whilst she felt herself filling up with strength and energy. She
had lost all shame now, and wasn’t bothered about showing
her pleasure; she started to moan, pleading with him to touch
her, but, instead, the man grabbed her and threw her onto the
bed.
He violently forced her legs apart—although she knew this
violence would not actually harm her—and tied each leg to
one corner of the bed. Now that her wrists were handcuffed
behind her, her legs splayed, her mouth gagged, when would
he penetrate her? Couldn’t he see that she was ready, that she
wanted to serve him, that she was his slave, his creature, his
object, and would do anything he ordered her to do?
“Would you like me to take you further still?”
She saw him place the end of the whip handle against her
vagina. He rubbed it up and down, and when it touched her
clitoris, she lost all control. She had no idea how long they had
been there nor how many times she had been spanked, but
suddenly she came and had the orgasm which, in all those
months, dozens, no, hundreds of men had failed to give her.
There was a burst of light, she felt herself entering a kind of
black hole in her soul, in which intense pain and fear mingled
with total pleasure, pushing her beyond all previously known
limits and she moaned and screamed, her voice muffled by the
gag, she writhed about on the bed, feeling the handcuffs
cutting into her wrists and the leather thongs bruising her
ankles, she moved as never before precisely because she could
not move, she screamed as never before because she had a gag
on her mouth and no one would be able to hear her. This was
pain and pleasure, the end of the whip handle pressing ever
harder against her clitoris and the orgasm flooding out of her
mouth, her vagina, her pores, her eyes, her skin.
She entered a kind of trance, and slowly, very slowly, she
began to come down; there was no whip pressing between her
legs now, just sweat-drenched hair, kind hands removing the
handcuffs, untying the leather thongs around her ankles.
She lay there, confused, unable to look at the man because
she was ashamed of herself, of her screams, of her orgasm. He
was stroking her hair and he too was breathing hard, but the
pleasure had been entirely hers; he had not enjoyed a single
moment of ecstasy.
Her naked body embraced that of this fully clothed man,
who was exhausted from shouting orders and keeping tight
control of the situation. She didn’t know what to say, how to
continue, but she felt safe and protected, because he had
invited her to go to a place inside herself that she had never
known before; he was her protector and her master.
She started to cry, and he waited patiently until she had
finished.
“What did you do to me?” she asked tearfully.
“What you wanted me to do.”
She looked at him, feeling that she needed him desperately.
“I didn’t force you or oblige you to do anything, nor did I
hear you say ‘yellow’; I had only the power you gave me.
There was no obligation, no blackmail on my part, only your
will; you may have been the slave and I the master, but my
only power was to push you in the direction of your own
freedom.”
Handcuffs. Leather thongs around her ankles. A gag.
Humiliation that was more intense and more potent than any
pain. And yet—he was quite right—the feeling was one of
total freedom. Maria felt full of energy and vigor and was
surprised to see that the man beside her was utterly exhausted.
“Did you come?”
“No,” he said. “The master is here to drive the slave on.
The pleasure of the slave is the joy of the master.”
None of this made sense, because it wasn’t the way it was
in stories, it wasn’t the way it was in real life. But here in this
fantasy world, she was full of light, while he seemed opaque,
drained.
“You can leave whenever you want,” Terence said.
“I don’t want to leave, I want to understand.”
“There’s nothing to understand.”
She got up in all the beauty and intensity of her nakedness
and poured two glasses of wine. She lit two cigarettes and
gave him one of them—the roles were reversed, she was now
the mistress serving the slave, rewarding him for the pleasure
he had given her.
“I’ll get dressed and then I’ll leave, but, first, I’d like to talk
a little.”
“There’s nothing to talk about. That’s all I wanted, and you
were marvelous. I’m tired now and I have to go back to
London tomorrow.”
He lay down and closed his eyes. Maria didn’t know if he
was just pretending to sleep and she didn’t care; she smoked a
leisurely cigarette and slowly sipped her wine, with her face
pressed against the window pane, looking out at the lake
opposite and wishing that someone, on the other shore, could
see her like this—naked, replete, satisfied, confident.
She got dressed and left without saying goodbye, and was
not bothered whether she opened the door or he did, because
she wasn’t sure that she wanted to come back.
Terence heard the door close, waited to see if she would
come back, saying that she had forgotten something, and only
after a few minutes did he get up and light another cigarette.
The girl had style, he thought. She had withstood the whip
well, although this was the oldest, the most common and the
least severe of the punishments. For a moment, he sat
remembering the first time he had experienced that mysterious
relationship between two beings who want to be close, but can
only be so by inflicting suffering.
Millions of couples out there practiced the art of
sadomasochism every day, without even realizing it. They
went to work, came back, complained about everything,
insulted their wife or were insulted by her, felt wretched, but
were, nonetheless, tightly bound to their own unhappiness, not
realizing that all it would take was a single gesture, a final
goodbye, to free them from that oppression. Terence had
experienced this with his wife, a well-known English singer;
he was tormented by jealousy, he made scenes, and spent
whole days dosed up with painkillers, whole nights hopelessly
drunk. She loved him and couldn’t understand why he
behaved like that; he loved her and couldn’t understand his
own behavior. It was as if the agony that the one inflicted on
the other was necessary, fundamental to life.
One day, a musician—whom he had always thought of as
very strange, because he seemed so normal in the midst of all
those exotic people—left a book behind in the studio: Venus in
Furs by Leopold von Sacher-Masoch. Terence started leafing
through it and, as he read, he began to understand himself
better.
“The lovely woman took off her clothes and picked up a
long, short-handled whip. ‘You asked for it,’ she said, ‘so I’m
going to whip you.’ ‘Oh, yes,’ murmured her lover, ‘please, I
beg you.’”
His wife was on the other side of the glass screen,
rehearsing. She had asked them to turn off the microphones
that allowed the technicians to listen in to everything, and they
had done so. Terence was thinking that perhaps she was
making a date with the pianist, and he realized that she was
driving him mad, but it was as if he was so accustomed to
suffering now that he could not live without it.
“I’m going to whip you,” said the naked woman in the
book he was reading. “Oh, yes, please, I beg you.”
He was a good-looking man, and a force to be reckoned
with in the record company, why did he need to lead such a
life?
Because he wanted to. He deserved to suffer because life
had been so good to him, and he wasn’t worthy of all these
blessings—money, respect, fame. He felt that his career was
leading him to a point where he would become dependent on
success, and that frightened him, because he had seen a lot of
people plummet from the heights.
He read the book. He started reading everything he could
find about the mysterious union between pain and pleasure.
His wife found the videos he was renting and the books he was
hiding from her, and asked him what it was all about, was he
sick? Terence said no, it was just research he was doing for a
new cover. Then he said nonchalantly:
“Perhaps we should try it.”
They did. They began very timidly, using the manuals they
found in porn shops. Gradually, they developed new
techniques, took their activities to dangerous limits, and yet
they felt that their marriage was even stronger. They were
accomplices in something hidden, forbidden, proscribed.
Their joint experience was transformed into art: they
created new outfits—leather with metal studs. His wife went
on stage wearing boots and a suspender belt and wielding a
whip, and the audience went wild. Her new record shot to the
top of the charts in England and went on to triumph in the rest
of Europe. Terence was surprised how young people accepted
his personal fantasies as perfectly natural, and the only
explanation he could find was that it provided a means of
expressing repressed violence in an intense but inoffensive
manner.
The whip came to be the group’s logo and was reproduced
on T-shirts, fake tattoos, stickers and postcards. Terence’s
intellectual bent drove him to track down the origins of all
this, so that he could understand himself better.
These origins did not lie, as he had told Maria, with those
penitents trying to drive away the Black Death. Ever since the
Dark Ages, man has understood that suffering, if confronted
without fear, is his passport to freedom.
Egypt, Rome and Persia all shared the notion that a man
can save his country and his world by sacrificing himself.
Whenever there was a great natural disaster in China, the
emperor was punished, because he was the divinity’s Earthly
representative. In ancient Greece, the finest Spartan warriors
were whipped once a year, from morning till night, in homage
to the goddess Artemis, while the crowd urged them on,
calling on them to withstand the pain with dignity, for it was
preparing them for the world of war. At the end of the day, the
priests would examine the wounds on the warriors’ backs and
use them to predict the city’s future.
The priests of the desert, in an ancient, fourth-century
Christian community that grew up around a monastery in
Alexandria, used flagellation as a way of driving out demons
or of proving the futility of the body in the spiritual search.
The history of saints was full of similar examples—St. Rosa
running through the garden, letting the thorns tear her skin, St.
Domingos Loricatus whipping himself every night before
sleeping, the martyrs who voluntarily offered themselves up to
a slow death on the cross or being torn apart by wild animals.
They all said that pain, once mastered, could lead to religious
ecstasy.
Recent, unconfirmed studies indicated that a particular kind
of fungus with hallucinogenic properties grew in the wounds
and caused visions. The pleasure was so intense that the
practice soon left the monasteries and convents and spread
throughout the world.
In 1718, A Treatise on Self-flagellation was published,
which showed how to achieve pleasure through pain, but
without harming the body. At the end of that century, there
were dozens of places in Europe where people were prepared
to suffer in order to attain joy. There are records of kings and
princesses who had their slaves whip them, until they found
that another kind of pleasure—albeit more exhausting and less
gratifying—was to be found not only in being whipped, but
also in inflicting pain.
While he was smoking his cigarette, Terence took a certain
pleasurable pride in knowing that most people would be
unable to understand what he was thinking.
It was better to belong to an exclusive club to which only
the chosen had access. He remembered again how the torment
of marriage had been transformed into the miracle of marriage.
His wife knew that he visited Geneva for this purpose and she
didn’t mind; on the contrary, in this sick world, she was glad
that her husband got the reward he wanted after a hard week at
work.
The girl who had just left the room had understood
everything. He felt that his soul was very close to hers,
although he wasn’t yet ready to fall in love, for he loved his
wife. But he liked to think that he was free and could dream of
a new relationship.
All he had to do was to get her to attempt the next and most
difficult stage: the transformation into Sacher-Masoch’s
“Venus in Furs,” the Dominatrix, the Mistress, capable of
humiliating and punishing without pity. If she passed the test,
he was ready to open his heart and let her in.
From Maria’s diary, when she was still drunk on vodka and
pleasure:
When I had nothing to lose, I had everything. When I stopped
being who I am, I found myself.
When I experienced humiliation and total submission, I was
free. I don’t know if I’m ill, if it was all a dream, or if it only
happens once. I know that I can perfectly well live without it,
but I would like to do it again, to repeat the experience, to go
still further.
I was a bit frightened by the pain, but it wasn’t as bad as
the humiliation, and it was just a pretext. When I had my first
orgasm in many months, despite all the many men I’ve been
with and the many different things they’ve done with my body,
I felt—is this possible?—closer to God. I remembered what he
said about how the flagellants, in offering up their pain for the
salvation of humanity, found pleasure. I didn’t want to save
humanity, or him or me; I was just there.
The art of sex is the art of controlled abandon.
It wasn’t theater this time, they were in a real train station, at
Maria’s request, because she liked the pizza you could buy
there. There was nothing wrong with being a bit wayward
sometimes. Ralf ought to have come to see her the day before,
when she was still a woman in search of love, an open fire,
wine and desire. But life had chosen otherwise, and today she
had got through the whole day without once having to make
herself concentrate on the sounds around her or on the present
moment, simply because she hadn’t thought about Ralf; she
had discovered other more interesting things to think about.
What was she to do with this man beside her, who was
eating a pizza he probably didn’t like and who was just
passing the time until the moment came for them to go to his
house? When he had come into the club and offered her a
drink, she had thought of telling him that she wasn’t interested
anymore and that he should find someone else; on the other
hand, she had an enormous need to talk to someone about the
previous night.
She had tried talking to one or two of the other prostitutes
who served the “special clients,” but none of them would tell
her anything, because Maria was bright, she learned quickly
and had become the great threat in the Copacabana. Of all the
men she knew, Ralf Hart was the only one who would
understand, because Milan considered him too to be a “special
client.” But he looked at her with eyes alight with love, and
that made things difficult; it was best to say nothing.
“What do you know about pain, suffering and pleasure?”
She had once again failed to keep her thoughts to herself.
Ralf stopped eating his pizza.
“Everything. And it doesn’t interest me in the least.”
The reply had been instant, and Maria was shocked. Was
she the only person in the world who didn’t know everything?
What kind of world was this?
“I’ve confronted my demons and my dark side,” Ralf went
on. “I’ve been to the very depths and tried everything, not just
in that area, but in many others too. On the last night we met,
however, I went beyond my limits through desire, not pain. I
plunged into the depths of my soul and I know that I still want
good things, many good things from this life.”
He wanted to say: “One of those good things is you, so,
please, don’t go down that path.” But he didn’t have the
courage; instead, he called a taxi and asked the driver to take
them to the lake shore, where, an eternity before, they had
walked together on the day they first met. Maria understood
the request and said nothing; her instinct told her that she had
a lot to lose, although her mind was still drunk on what had
happened the night before.
She only awoke from her passive state when they reached
the gardens beside the lake; although it was still summer, it
was already starting to get very cold at night.
“What are we doing here?” she asked, as they got out of the
taxi. “It’s windy. I might catch a cold.”
“I’ve been thinking about what you said at the train station,
about suffering and pleasure. Take your shoes off.”
She remembered that once, one of her clients had asked the
same thing, and had been aroused simply by looking at her
feet. Would Adventure never leave her in peace?
“I’ll catch a cold.”
“Do as I say,” he insisted. “You won’t catch a cold if we’re
quick. Believe in me, as I believe in you.”
For some reason, Maria realized that he was trying to help
her; perhaps because he himself had once drunk of some very
bitter water and was afraid that she was running the same risk.
She didn’t want to be helped; she was happy with her new
world, in which she was learning that suffering wasn’t a
problem anymore. Then she thought of Brazil, of the
impossibility of finding a partner with whom to share that
different universe, and since Brazil was the most important
thing in her life, she took off her shoes. The ground was
covered in small stones that immediately tore her stockings,
but that didn’t matter, she could buy some more.
“Take off your jacket.”
She could have said “no,” but, since last night, she had got
used to the joy of saying “yes” to everything that came her
way. She took off her jacket, and her body, still warm, took a
while to react, then gradually the cold began to get to her.
“We can talk and walk at the same time.”
“I can’t walk here, the ground’s covered in stones.”
“Exactly. I want you to feel these stones, I want them to
hurt you and bruise you, because, just as I did, you have
started to associate suffering with pleasure, and I need to tear
that out of your soul.”
Maria felt like saying: “There’s no need, I like it.” Instead,
she began walking slowly along, and the soles of her feet
began to burn with the cold and the sharp edges of the stones.
“One of my exhibitions took me to Japan, just when I was
immersed in what you called ‘pain, suffering and pleasure.’ At
the time, I thought there was no way back, that I would go
deeper and deeper down, until there was nothing left in my life
but the desire to punish and be punished.
“After all, we are human beings, we are born full of guilt;
we feel terrified when happiness becomes a real possibility;
and we die wanting to punish everyone else because we feel
impotent, ill-used and unhappy. To pay for one’s sins and be
able to punish the sinners, wouldn’t that be delicious? Oh, yes,
wonderful.”
Maria was still walking, the pain and the cold were making
it hard for her to concentrate on what he was saying, but she
was doing her best.
“I noticed the marks on your wrists today.”
The handcuffs. She had put on several bracelets to disguise
the marks, but the expert eye knows what to look for.
“Now, if your recent experiences are leading you to take
that step, I won’t stop you, but you should know that none of it
has anything to do with real life.”
“Take what step?”
“Into pain and pleasure, sadism and masochism. Call it
what you like, but if you’re sure that’s the right path for you, I
will be sad, I’ll remember that feeling of desire, our meetings,
our walk along the road to Santiago, your light. I will treasure
the pen you gave me, and every time I light the fire, I will
remember you. But I will never again come looking for you.”
Maria felt afraid; she felt it was time to recant, to tell him
the truth, to stop pretending that she knew more than he did.
“What I experienced recently—last night, in fact—was
something I’ve never experienced before. And it frightens me
to think that I could only find myself at the very limits of
degradation.”
It was becoming difficult to speak—her teeth were
chattering and her feet were really hurting.
“My exhibition was held in a region called Kumano, and
one of the people who came to see it was a woodcutter,” Ralf
went on, as if he hadn’t heard what she had said. “He didn’t
like my pictures, but he was able to see, through the paintings,
what I was experiencing and feeling. The following day, he
came to my hotel and asked me if I was happy; if I was, I
should continue doing what I liked. If I wasn’t, I should go
and spend a few days with him.
“He made me walk on stones, just as I am making you do
today. He made me feel the cold. He forced me to understand
the beauty of pain, except that the pain was imposed by nature,
not by man. He called this shu-gen-do, a very ancient practice
apparently.
“He told me that I was someone who wasn’t afraid of pain,
and that was good, because in order to master the soul, one
must also learn to master the body. He told me, too, that I was
using pain in the wrong way, and that was very bad.
“This uneducated woodcutter thought he knew me better
than I did myself, and that annoyed me, but at the same time, I
felt proud to think that my paintings were capable of
expressing exactly what I was feeling.”
Maria was aware of a sharp stone cutting into her foot, but
she could barely feel it for the cold, her body was growing
numb, and she could only just follow what Ralf Hart was
saying. Why was it that in God’s holy world men were only
interested in showing her pain. Sacred pain, pain with
pleasure, pain with explanations or without, but always pain,
pain, pain…
Her cut foot stumbled on another stone; she smothered a
cry and continued on. At first, she had managed to maintain
her integrity, her self-control, what he called her “light.” Now,
though, she was walking very slowly, with both her stomach
and her mind churning: she felt as if she were about to throw
up. She considered stopping, because none of this made any
sense, but she didn’t.
And she didn’t stop out of respect for herself; she could
stand that barefoot walk as long as she had to, because it
wouldn’t last all her life. And suddenly another thought
crossed her mind: what if she couldn’t go to the Copacabana
tomorrow night because she had injured her feet, or because of
a fever brought on by the flu that would doubtless install itself
in her overexposed body? She thought of the customers who
would be expecting her, of Milan who so trusted her, of the
money she wouldn’t earn, of the farm, of her proud parents.
But the suffering soon drove out all such thoughts, and she
kept placing one foot in front of the other, longing for Ralf
Hart to recognize the effort she was making and to tell her she
could stop and put her shoes back on again.
He seemed entirely indifferent, distant, as if this were the
only way of freeing her from something she didn’t as yet
really know about, something she found very seductive, but
which would leave far deeper marks than any handcuffs.
Although she knew he was trying to help her, and however
hard she tried to go forward and show him the light of her
willpower, the pain would not allow her any thoughts, noble or
profane; it was just pain, filling everything, frightening her and
forcing her to think that she did have limits and that she wasn’t
going to make it.
But she took one step.
And another.
The pain seemed about to invade her soul now and
undermine her spiritually, because it’s one thing to put on a bit
of theater in a five-star hotel, naked, with vodka and caviar
inside you and a whip between your legs, but it’s quite another
to be cold and barefoot, with stones lacerating your feet. She
was disoriented, she couldn’t think of a single thing to say to
Ralf Hart; all that existed in her universe were those small,
sharp stones that formed the path between the trees.
Then, just when she thought she was about to give up, she
was filled by a strange feeling: she had reached her limit, and
beyond it was an empty space, in which she seemed to float
above herself, unaware of what she was feeling. Was this what
the penitents had experienced? At the far extremity of pain,
she had discovered a door into a different level of
consciousness, and there was no room now for anything but
implacable nature and her own invincible self.
Everything around her became a dream: the ill-lit garden,
the dark lake, the man walking beside her, saying nothing, the
occasional couple out for a stroll, who failed to notice that she
was barefoot and having difficulty walking. She didn’t know if
it was the cold or the pain, but she suddenly lost all sense of
her own body and entered a state in which there was no desire
and no fear, only a mysterious—how could she describe it?—a
mysterious peace. The pain barrier was not a barrier for her;
she could go beyond it.
She thought of all the people enduring unasked-for
suffering and there she was, bringing suffering upon herself,
but that didn’t matter anymore, she had crossed the frontiers of
the body, and now there was only soul, “light,” a kind of void,
which someone, some day, called Paradise. There are certain
sufferings which can only be forgotten once we have
succeeded in floating above our own pain.
The next thing she knew, Ralf was picking her up and
putting his jacket around her shoulders. She must have fainted
from the cold, but she didn’t care; she was happy, she hadn’t
been afraid—she had come through. She had not humbled
herself before him.
The minutes became hours, she must have gone to sleep in his
arms, because when she woke up, although it was still dark,
she was in a room with a TV in one corner, and nothing else.
White, empty.
Ralf appeared with a cup of hot chocolate.
“Good,” he said. “You got to the place you needed to get
to.”
“I don’t want hot chocolate, I want wine. And I want to go
downstairs to our place by the fire, with books all around us.”
She had said “our place.” That wasn’t what she had
planned.
She looked at her feet; apart from a small cut, there were
just a few red marks, which would disappear in a few hours’
time. With some difficulty, she went downstairs, without really
looking around her. She went and sat down on the rug by the
fire—she had discovered that she always felt good there, as if
that really was her “place” in the house.
“The woodcutter told me that whenever you do some form
of physical exercise, when you demand the maximum from
your body, the mind gains a strange spiritual strength, which
has to do with the ‘light’ I saw in you. What did you feel?”
“I felt that pain is woman’s friend.”
“That is the danger.”
“I also felt that pain has its limits.”
“That is the salvation. Don’t forget that.”
Maria’s mind was still confused; she had experienced that
“peace” when she had gone beyond her own limits. He had
shown her a different kind of suffering that had also given her
a strange pleasure.
Ralf picked up a large file and opened it up in front of her.
It contained drawings.
“The history of prostitution. That’s what you asked me for
when we met.”
Yes, she had, but it had only been a way of making
conversation, of trying to appear interesting. It was of no
importance now.
“All this time, I’ve been sailing in uncharted waters. I
didn’t think there was a history, I thought it was just the oldest
profession in the world, as people say. But there is a history,
or, rather, two histories.”
“And what are these drawings?”
Ralf Hart looked slightly disappointed at her apparent lack
of interest in what he had said, but quickly set aside these
feelings and went on.
“They’re the things I jotted down as I was reading,
researching, learning.”
“Let’s talk about that another day. I don’t want to change
the subject today. I need to understand about pain.”
“You experienced pain yesterday and you discovered that it
led to pleasure. You experienced it today and found peace.
That’s why I’m telling you: don’t get used to it, because it’s
very easy to become habituated; it’s a very powerful drug. It’s
in our daily lives, in our hidden suffering, in the sacrifices we
make, blaming love for the destruction of our dreams. Pain is
frightening when it shows its real face, but it’s seductive when
it comes disguised as sacrifice or self-denial. Or cowardice.
However much we may reject it, we human beings always find
a way of being with pain, of flirting with it and making it part
of our lives.”
“I don’t believe that. No one wants to suffer.”
“If you think you can live without suffering, that’s a great
step forward, but don’t imagine that other people will
understand you. True, no one wants to suffer, and yet nearly
everyone seeks out pain and sacrifice, and then they feel
justified, pure, deserving of the respect of their children,
husbands, neighbors, God. Don’t let’s think about that now; all
you need to know is that what makes the world go round is not
the search for pleasure, but the renunciation of all that is
important.
“Does a soldier go to war in order to kill the enemy? No, he
goes in order to die for his country. Does a wife want to show
her husband how happy she is? No, she wants him to see how
devoted she is, how she suffers in order to make him happy.
Does the husband go to work thinking he will find personal
fulfillment there? No, he is giving his sweat and tears for the
good of the family. And so it goes on: sons give up their
dreams to please their parents, parents give up their lives in
order to please their children; pain and suffering are used to
justify the one thing that should bring only joy: love.”
“Stop.”
Ralf stopped. It was the right moment to change the
subject, and he started showing her drawing after drawing. At
first, it all seemed rather confusing: there were a few outlines
of people, but also scrawls and scribbles, geometric shapes and
colors. Gradually, though, she began to understand what he
was saying, because each word he spoke was accompanied by
a gesture of the hand, and each phrase placed her in the world
which, up until then, she had always denied she was part of—
telling herself that it was just one stage in her life, a way of
earning money, nothing more.
“Yes, I discovered that there is not just one history of
prostitution, but two. The first one you know all too well,
because it is your history too: a pretty young girl, for reasons
which she has chosen or which have chosen her, decides that
the only way she can survive is by selling her body. Some end
up ruling nations, as Messalina did in Rome, others become
legendary figures, like Madame du Barry, still others chase
after adventure and misfortune, like the spy, Mata Hari. But
the majority never have their moment of glory, are never faced
by a great challenge: they will always be young girls from the
interior in search of fame, a husband, adventure, but who end
up discovering quite a different reality, into which they plunge
for a time, and to which they become accustomed, always
believing that they are in control and yet ultimately unable to
do anything else.
“Artists have been making sculptures and paintings and
writing books for more than three thousand years. In just the
same way, throughout all that time, prostitutes have carried on
their work as if nothing very much ever changes. Would you
like to know details?”
Maria nodded. She needed time in order to understand
about pain, although she was starting to feel as if something
very bad had left her body during that walk in the park.
“Prostitutes appear in classical texts, in Egyptian
hieroglyphs, in Sumerian writings, in the Old and New
Testament. But the profession only started to become
organized in the sixth century B.C., when a Greek legislator,
Solon, set up state-controlled brothels and began imposing
taxes on ‘the skin trade.’ Athenian businessmen were pleased
because what was once prohibited became legal. The
prostitutes, on the other hand, started to be classified according
to how much tax they paid.
“The cheapest were the pornai, slaves who belonged to the
owners of the establishment. Next came the peripatetica, who
picked up her clients in the street. Lastly, the most expensive
and highest quality, was the hetaera, the female companion,
who accompanied businessmen on their trips, dined in chic
restaurants, controlled her own money, gave advice and
meddled in the political life of the city. As you see, what
happened then still happens now.
“In the Middle Ages, because of sexually transmitted
diseases…”
Silence, fear of catching a cold, the heat of the fire—
necessary now to warm her body and her soul…. Maria didn’t
want to hear any more history, it gave her a sense that the
world had stopped, that everything was being endlessly
repeated, and that mankind would never give sex the respect it
deserved.
“You don’t seem very interested.”
She pulled herself together. After all, he was the man to
whom she had decided to give her heart, although now she
wasn’t so sure.
“I’m not interested in what I know about; it just makes me
sad. You said there was another history.”
“The other history is exactly the opposite: sacred
prostitution.”
She had suddenly emerged from her somnolent state and
was listening to him intently. Sacred prostitution? Earning
money from sex and yet still able to approach God?
“The Greek historian, Herodotus, wrote of Babylonia:
‘They have a strange custom here, by which every woman
born in Sumeria is obliged, at least once in her lifetime, to go
to the temple of the goddess Ishtar and give her body to a
stranger, as a symbol of hospitality and for a symbolic price.’”
She would ask him about that goddess later; perhaps she
would help her to recover something she had lost, although
just what that was she did not know.
“The influence of the goddess Ishtar spread throughout the
Middle East, as far as Sardinia, Sicily and the Mediterranean
ports. Later, during the Roman Empire, another goddess,
Vesta, demanded total virginity or total surrender. In order to
keep the sacred fire burning, the women serving her temple
were responsible for initiating young men and kings on the
path of sexuality—they sang erotic hymns, entered trance-like
states and gave their ecstasy to the universe in a kind of
communion with the divinity.”
Ralf Hart showed her a photocopy of some ancient lyrics,
with a translation in German at the foot of the page. He read
slowly, translating each line as he went:
“When I am sitting at the door of a tavern,
I, Ishtar, the goddess,
Am prostitute, mother, wife, divinity.
I am what people call life,
Although you call it death.
I am what people call Law,
Although you call it Delinquency.
I am what you seek
And what you find.
I am what you scattered
And the pieces you now gather up.”
Maria was sobbing softly, and Ralf Hart laughed; his vital
energy was returning, his “light” was beginning to shine again.
It was best to continue the history, to show her the drawings,
to make her feel loved.
“No one knows why sacred prostitution disappeared, since
it had lasted not centuries, perhaps, but for at least two
millennia. Maybe it was disease or because society changed its
rules when it changed religions. Anyway, it no longer exists,
and will never exist again; nowadays, men control the world,
and the term serves only to create a stigma, and any woman
who steps out of line is automatically dubbed a prostitute.”
“Could you come to the Copacabana tomorrow?”
Ralf didn’t understand why she was asking this, but he
agreed at once.
From Maria’s diary, after the night she walked barefoot in the
Jardin Anglais in Geneva:
I don’t care whether it was once sacred or not, I HATE WHAT
I DO. It’s destroying my soul, making me lose touch with
myself, teaching me that pain is a reward, that money buys
everything and justifies everything.
No one around me is happy; the clients know they are
paying for something that should be free, and that’s
depressing. The women know that they have to sell something
which they would like to give out of pleasure and affection,
and that is destructive. I’ve struggled long and hard before
writing this, before accepting how unhappy and dissatisfied I
am—I needed and I still need to hold out for a few more
weeks.
But I cannot simply do nothing, pretend that everything is
normal, that it’s just a stage, a phase of my life. I want to
forget it, I need to love—that’s all, I need to love.
Life is too short, or too long, for me to allow myself the
luxury of living it so badly.
It isn’t his house. It isn’t her house. It isn’t Brazil or
Switzerland. It’s a hotel, which could be anywhere in the
world, furnished, like all hotel rooms, in a way that tries to
create a familiar atmosphere, but which only makes it seem all
the more impersonal.
It isn’t the hotel with the lovely view of the lake and the
memory of pain, suffering and ecstasy; it looks out onto the
road to Santiago, a route of pilgrimage not penance, a place
where people meet in the cafés along the road, discover each
other’s “light,” talk, become friends, fall in love. It’s raining,
and at this time of night, no one is walking there, although
they have for years, decades, centuries—perhaps the road
needs to breathe, to rest from the many steps that trudge along
it every day.
Turn out the light. Close the curtains.
She asks him to take his clothes off and she does the same.
Darkness is never absolute, and as soon as her eyes become
accustomed to it, she can see the man’s silhouette, outlined
against the faintest of lights coming from who knows where.
The last time they met for this purpose, she had left only part
of her body naked.
She takes two carefully folded handkerchiefs, which have
been washed and rinsed several times to get rid of the slightest
trace of perfume or soap. She goes over to him and asks him to
blindfold himself. He hesitates for a moment, and makes some
remark about various hells he has been through before. She
says it’s nothing to do with that, she just needs total darkness;
now it is her turn to teach him something, just as yesterday he
taught her about pain. He gives in and puts on the blindfold.
She does the same; now there is not a glimmer of light, they
are in absolute darkness, and they have to hold hands in order
to reach the bed.
“No, we mustn’t lie down. Let’s sit as we always do, face
to face, only a little closer, so that my knees touch your
knees.”
She has always wanted to do this, but she never had what
she most needed: time. Not with her first boyfriend, or with
the man who penetrated her for the first time. Not with the
Arab who paid her a thousand francs, perhaps hoping for more
than she was able to give him, although a thousand francs
wouldn’t be enough for her to buy what she wanted. Not with
the many men who had passed through her body, who have
come and gone between her legs, sometimes thinking about
themselves, sometimes thinking about her too, sometimes
harboring romantic dreams, sometimes instinctively repeating
certain words because they have been told that that is what
men do, and that if they don’t, they are not real men.
She thinks of her diary. She has had enough, she wants the
remaining weeks to pass quickly, and that is why she is giving
herself to this man, because the light of her own love lies
hidden there. Original sin was not the apple that Eve ate, it
was her belief that Adam needed to share precisely the thing
she had tasted. Eve was afraid to follow her path without
someone to help her, and so she wanted to share what she was
feeling.
Certain things cannot be shared. Nor can we be afraid of
the oceans into which we plunge of our own free will; fear
cramps everyone’s style. Man goes through hell in order to
understand this. Love one another, but let’s not try to possess
one another.
I love this man sitting before me now, because I do not
possess him and he does not possess me. We are free in our
mutual surrender; I need to repeat this dozens, hundreds,
millions of times, until I finally believe my own words.
She thinks about the other prostitutes who work with her.
She thinks about her mother and her friends. They all believe
that man feels desire for only eleven minutes a day, and that
they’ll pay a fortune for it. That’s not true; a man is also a
woman; he wants to find someone, to give meaning to his life.
Does her mother behave just as she does and pretend to
have an orgasm with her father? Or in the interior of Brazil, is
it still forbidden for a woman to take pleasure in sex? She
knows so little of life and love, and now—with her eyes
blindfolded and with all the time in the world, she is
discovering the origin of everything, and everything begins
where and how she would like it to have begun.
Touch. Forget prostitutes, clients, her mother and her father,
now she is in total darkness. She has spent the whole afternoon
wondering what she could give to a man who had restored her
dignity and made her understand that the search for happiness
is more important than the need for pain.
I would like to give him the happiness of teaching me
something new, just as yesterday he taught me about suffering,
street prostitutes and sacred prostitutes. I saw how much he
enjoys teaching me things, so let him teach me, guide me. I
would like to know how one reaches the body, without going
via the soul, penetration, orgasm.
She holds out her hand and asks him to do the same. She
whispers a few words, saying that tonight, in this no-man’sland, she would like him to discover her skin, the boundary
between her and the world. She asks him to touch her, to feel
her with his hands, because bodies always understand each
other, even when souls do not. He begins touching her, and she
touches him too, and, as if by prior agreement, they both avoid
the parts of the body where sexual energy surfaces most
rapidly.
His fingers touch her face, and she can smell just a hint of
ink on them, a smell that will stay there forever, even if he
washes his hands thousands and millions of times, a smell
which was there when he was born, when he saw his first tree,
his first house, and decided to draw them in his dreams. He
must be able to smell something on her hands too, but she
doesn’t know what, and doesn’t want to ask, because at that
moment everything is body, and the rest is silence.
She caresses and is caressed. She could stay like this all
night, because it is so pleasurable and won’t necessarily end in
sex, and at that moment, precisely because there is no
obligation to have sex, she feels hot between her legs and
knows that she has become wet. When he touches her there, he
will discover this, and she doesn’t know if this is good or bad,
this is just how her body is reacting, and she doesn’t intend
telling him to go here or there, more slowly or more quickly.
His hands are touching her armpits now, the hairs on her arms
stand on end, and she feels like pushing his hands away, but it
feels good, although perhaps it is pain she is feeling. She does
the same to him and notices that the skin in his armpits has a
different texture, perhaps because of the deodorant they both
use, but what is she thinking of? She mustn’t think. She must
touch, that is all.
His fingers trace circles around her breast, like an animal
watching. She wants them to move more quickly, to touch her
nipples, because her thoughts are moving faster than his hands,
but, perhaps knowing this, he provokes, lingers, takes an age
to get there. Her nipples are hard now, he plays with them a
little, and that causes more goose pimples, causes her to
become hotter and wetter. Now he is moving across her belly,
then down to her legs, her feet, he strokes his hands up and
down her inner thigh, he feels the heat, but does not approach,
his touch is soft, light, and the lighter it is the more
intoxicating.
She does the same, her hands almost floating over his skin,
touching only the hairs on his legs, and she too feels the heat
when she approaches his genitals. Suddenly, it is as if she had
mysteriously recovered her virginity, as if she were
discovering a man’s body for the first time. She touches his
penis. It is not as hard as she imagined, and yet she is so wet,
how unfair, but maybe a man needs more time, who knows.
And she begins to stroke it as only virgins know how,
because prostitutes have long since forgotten. The man reacts,
his penis begins to grow in her hands, and she slowly increases
the pressure, knowing now where she should touch, more at
the bottom than at the top, she must wrap her fingers around it,
push the skin back, towards his body. Now he is excited, very
excited, he touches the lips of her vagina, still very softly, and
she feels like asking him to be more forceful, to put his fingers
right inside. But he doesn’t do that, he moistens the clitoris
with a little of the liquid pouring from her womb, and again
makes the same circular movements he made on her nipples.
This man touches her exactly as she would touch herself.
One of his hands goes back to her breast; it feels so good,
she wishes he would put his arms around her now. But, no,
they are discovering the body, they have time, they need a lot
of time. They could make love now; it would be the most
natural thing in the world, and it might be good, but all this is
so new, she needs to control herself, she does not want to spoil
everything. She remembers the wine they drank on that first
night, how they sipped it slowly, savoring each mouthful, how
she felt it warming her and how it made her see the world
differently and left her more at ease and more in touch with
life.
She wants to drink that man too, and then she can forget
forever the cheap wine that you gulp down and that makes you
feel drunk, but always leaves you with a headache and an
empty space in your soul.
She stops, slowly entwines her fingers with his, she hears a
moan and would like to moan too, but she stops herself, she
feels heat spreading throughout her body; the same thing must
be happening to him. Without an orgasm, the energy disperses,
travels to the brain, not letting her think of anything but going
all the way, but this is what she wants, to stop, to stop halfway,
to spread the pleasure through her whole body, to allow it to
invade her mind, renewing her commitment and her desire,
restoring her virginity.
She gently removes the blindfold from her own eyes and
removes his too. She turns on the bedside lamp. Both are
naked; they do not smile, they simply look at each other. I am
love, I am music, she thinks. Let’s dance.
But she doesn’t say anything: they talk about something
trivial, about when they will next meet, she suggests a date,
perhaps in two days’ time. He says he would like to invite her
to an exhibition, but she hesitates. That would mean getting to
know his world, his friends, and what would they say, what
would they think.
She says no, but he realizes that she really wants to say yes,
and so he insists, using a few foolish arguments, but which are
all part of the dance they are dancing now, and in the end she
agrees, because that is what she would like. They arrange
where to meet—in the same café where they met that first
day? No, she says, Brazilians are very superstitious, and you
must never meet in the same place where you first met,
because that might close a cycle and bring everything to an
end.
He says that he’s glad she doesn’t want to close that
particular cycle. They decide to meet at a church from where
you can see the whole city, and which is on the road to
Santiago, part of the mysterious pilgrimage that the two of
them have been on ever since they met.
From Maria’s diary, on the eve of buying her ticket back to
Brazil:
Once upon a time, there was a bird. He was adorned with two
perfect wings and with glossy, colorful, marvelous feathers. In
short, he was a creature made to fly about freely in the sky,
bringing joy to everyone who saw him.
One day, a woman saw this bird and fell in love with him.
She watched his flight, her mouth wide in amazement, her
heart pounding, her eyes shining with excitement. She invited
the bird to fly with her, and the two travelled across the sky in
perfect harmony. She admired and venerated and celebrated
that bird.
But then she thought: He might want to visit far-off
mountains! And she was afraid, afraid that she would never
feel the same way about any other bird. And she felt envy, envy
for the bird’s ability to fly.
And she felt alone.
And she thought: “I’m going to set a trap. The next time the
bird appears, he will never leave again.”
The bird, who was also in love, returned the following day,
fell into the trap and was put in a cage.
She looked at the bird every day. There he was, the object
of her passion, and she showed him to her friends, who said:
“Now you have everything you could possibly want.”
However, a strange transformation began to take place: now
that she had the bird and no longer needed to woo him, she
began to lose interest. The bird, unable to fly and express the
true meaning of his life, began to waste away and his feathers
to lose their gloss; he grew ugly; and the woman no longer
paid him any attention, except by feeding him and cleaning out
his cage.
One day, the bird died. The woman felt terribly sad and
spent all her time thinking about him. But she did not
remember the cage, she thought only of the day when she had
seen him for the first time, flying contentedly amongst the
clouds.
If she had looked more deeply into herself, she would have
realized that what had thrilled her about the bird was his
freedom, the energy of his wings in motion, not his physical
body.
Without the bird, her life too lost all meaning, and Death
came knocking at her door. “Why have you come?” she asked
Death. “So that you can fly once more with him across the
sky,” Death replied. “If you had allowed him to come and go,
you would have loved and admired him even more; alas, you
now need me in order to find him again.”
She started the day by doing something she had rehearsed over
and over during all these past months: she went into a travel
agent’s and bought a ticket to Brazil for the date she had
marked on her calendar, in two weeks’ time.
From then on, Geneva would be the face of a man she
loved and who had loved her. Rue de Berne would just be a
name, an homage to Switzerland’s capital city. She would
remember her room, the lake, the French language, the crazy
things a twenty-three-year-old woman (it had been her
birthday the night before) is capable of—until she realizes
there is a limit.
She would not cage the bird, nor would she suggest he go
with her to Brazil; he was the only truly pure thing that had
happened to her. A bird like that must fly free and feed on
nostalgia for the time when he flew alongside someone else.
And she too was a bird; having Ralf Hart by her side would
mean remembering forever her days at the Copacabana. And
that was her past, not her future.
She decided to say “goodbye” just once, when the moment
came for her to leave, rather than have to suffer every time she
thought: “Soon I won’t be here anymore.” So she played a
trick on her heart and, that morning, she walked around
Geneva as if she had always known those streets, that hill, the
road to Santiago, the Montblanc bridge, the bars she used to go
to. She watched the seagulls flying over the river, the market
traders taking down their stalls, people leaving their offices to
go to lunch, noticed the color and taste of the apple she was
eating, the planes landing in the distance, the rainbow in the
column of water rising up from the middle of the lake, the shy,
concealed joy of passersby, the looks she got, some full of
desire, some expressionless. She had lived for nearly a year in
a small town, like so many other small towns in the world, and
if it hadn’t been for the architecture peculiar to the place and
the excessive number of banks, it could have been the interior
of Brazil. There was a fair. There was a market. There were
housewives haggling over prices. There were students who
had skipped a class at school, on the excuse perhaps that their
mother or their father was ill, and who were now strolling by
the river, exchanging kisses. There were people who felt at
home and people who felt foreign. There were tabloid
newspapers full of scandals and respectable magazines for
businessmen, who, however, were only ever to be seen reading
the scandal sheets.
She went to the library to return the manual on farm
management. She hadn’t understood a word of it, but, at times
when she felt she had lost control of herself and of her destiny,
the book had served as a reminder of her objective in life. It
had been a silent companion, with its plain yellow cover, its
series of graphs, but, above all, it had been a lighthouse in the
dark nights of recent weeks.
Always making plans for the future, and always being
surprised by the present, she thought to herself. She felt she
had discovered herself through independence, despair, love,
pain, and back again to love—and she would like things to end
there.
The oddest thing of all was that, while some of her work
colleagues spoke of the wonder or the ecstasy of going to bed
with certain men, she had never discovered anything either
good or bad about herself through sex. She had not solved her
problem, she could still not have an orgasm through
penetration, and she had vulgarized the sexual act so much that
she might never again find the “embrace of recognition”—as
Ralf Hart called it—or the fire and joy she sought.
Or perhaps (as she occasionally thought, and as mothers,
fathers and romances all said) love was necessary if one was to
experience pleasure in bed.
The normally serious librarian (and Maria’s only friend,
although she had never told her so) was in a good mood. She
was having a bite to eat and invited her to share a sandwich.
Maria thanked her and said that she had just eaten.
“You took a long time to read this.”
“I didn’t understand a word.”
“Do you remember what you asked me once?”
No, she didn’t, but when she saw the mischievous look on
the other woman’s face, she guessed. Sex.
“You know, after you came here in search of books on the
subject, I decided to make a list of what we had. It wasn’t
much, and since we need to educate our young people in such
matters, I ordered a few more books. At least, this way they
won’t need to learn about sex in that worst of all possible ways
—by going with prostitutes.”
The librarian pointed to a pile of books in a corner, all
discreetly covered in brown paper.
“I haven’t had time to catalogue them yet, but I had a quick
glance through and I was horrified by what I read.”
Maria could imagine what the woman was going to say:
embarrassing positions, sadomasochism, things of that sort.
She had better tell her that she had to get back to work (she
couldn’t remember whether she had told her she worked in a
bank or in a shop—lying made life so complicated, she was
always forgetting what she had said).
She thanked her and was about to leave, when the other
woman said:
“You’d be horrified too. Did you know, for example, that
the clitoris is a recent invention?”
An invention? Recent? Just this week someone had touched
hers, as if it had always been there and as if those hands knew
the terrain they were exploring well, despite the total darkness.
“It was officially accepted in 1559, after a doctor, Realdo
Columbo, published a book entitled De re anatomica. It was
officially ignored for fifteen hundred years of the Christian
era. Columbo describes it in his book as ‘a pretty and a useful
thing.’ Can you believe it?”
They both laughed.
“Two years later, in 1561, another doctor, Gabriello
Fallopio, said that he had ‘discovered’ it. Imagine that! Two
men—Italians, of course, who know about such things—
arguing about who had officially added the clitoris to the
history books!”
It was an interesting conversation, but Maria didn’t want to
think about these things, mainly because she could already feel
the juices flowing and her vagina getting wet—just
remembering his touch, the blindfolds, his hands moving over
her body. No, she wasn’t dead to sex; that man had managed to
rescue her. It was good to be alive.
The librarian, however, was warming to her subject.
“Its ‘discovery’ didn’t mean it received any more respect,
though.” The librarian seemed to have become an expert on
clitorology, or whatever that science is called. “The
mutilations we read about now in certain African tribes, who
still insist on removing the woman’s right to sexual pleasure,
are nothing new. In the nineteenth century, here in Europe,
they were still performing operations to remove it, in the belief
that in that small, insignificant part of the female anatomy lay
the root of hysteria, epilepsy, adulterous tendencies and
sterility.”
Maria held out her hand to say goodbye, but the librarian
showed no signs of tiring.
“Worse still, dear Dr. Freud, the founder of psychoanalysis,
said that in a normal woman, the female orgasm should move
from the clitoris to the vagina. His most faithful followers
went further and said that if a woman’s sexual pleasure
remained concentrated in the clitoris, this was a sign of
infantilism or, worse, bisexuality.
“And yet, as we all know, it is very difficult to have an
orgasm just through penetration. It’s good to have sex with a
man, but pleasure lies in that little nub discovered by an
Italian!”
Distracted, Maria realized that she had that problem
diagnosed by Freud: she was still in the infantile stage, her
orgasm had not moved to the vagina. Or was Freud wrong?
“And what do you think about the G-spot?”
“Do you know where it is?”
The other woman blushed and coughed, but managed to
say:
“As you go in, on the first floor, the back window.”
Brilliant! She had described the vagina as if it were a
building! Perhaps she had read that explanation in a book for
young girls, to say that if someone knocks on the door and
comes in, you’ll discover a whole universe inside your own
body. Whenever she masturbated, she preferred to concentrate
on her G-spot rather than on the clitoris, since the latter made
her feel rather uncomfortable, a pleasure mingled with real
pain, rather troubling.
She always went straight to the first floor, to the back
window!
Seeing that the librarian was clearly never going to stop
talking, perhaps because she had discovered in Maria an
accomplice to her own lost sexuality, she gave a wave of her
hand and left, trying to concentrate on whatever nonsense
came into her head, because this was not a day to think about
farewells, clitorises, restored virginities or G-spots. She
focused on what was going on around her—bells ringing, dogs
barking, a tram rattling over the tracks, footsteps, her own
breathing, the signs offering everything under the sun.
She did not feel like going back to the Copacabana, and yet
she felt an obligation to work until the end, although she had
no real idea why—after all, she had saved enough money. She
could spend the afternoon doing some shopping, talking to the
bank manager, who was a client of hers, but who had promised
to help her manage her savings, having a cup of coffee
somewhere, sending off the clothes that wouldn’t fit into her
suitcases. It was strange, for some reason, she was feeling
rather sad; perhaps because it was still another two weeks
before she would leave, and she needed to get through that
time, to look at the city with different eyes and feel glad for
what she had experienced there.
She came to a crossroads where she had been hundreds of
time before; you could see the lake from there and the water
spout, and, on the far pavement, in the middle of the public
gardens, the lovely floral clock, one of the city’s symbols…
and that clock would not allow her to lie, because…
Suddenly, time and the world stood still.
What was this story she had been telling herself since the
morning, something about her recently restored virginity?
The world seemed frozen, that second would never end, she
was face to face with something very serious and very
important in her life, she could not just forget about it, she
could not do as she did with her nighttime dreams, which she
always promised herself she would write down and which she
never did…
“Don’t think about anything! The world has stopped.
What’s going on?”
ENOUGH!
The bird, the lovely story about the bird she had just
written—was it about Ralf Hart?
No, it was about her!
FULL STOP!
It was 11:11 in the morning, and she was frozen in that
moment. She was a foreigner inside her own body, she was
rediscovering her recently restored virginity, but its rebirth was
so fragile that if she stayed there, it would be lost forever. She
had experienced Heaven perhaps, certainly Hell, but the
Adventure was coming to an end. She couldn’t wait two
weeks, ten days, one week—she needed to leave now, because,
as she stood looking at the floral clock, with tourists taking
pictures of it and children playing all around, she had just
found out why she was sad.
And the reason was this: she didn’t want to go back.
And the reason she didn’t want to go back wasn’t Ralf
Hart, Switzerland or Adventure. The real reason couldn’t have
been simpler: money.
Money! A special piece of paper, decorated in sombre
colors, which everyone agreed was worth something—and she
believed it, everyone believed it—until you took a pile of that
paper to a bank, a respectable, traditional, highly confidential
Swiss bank and asked: “Could I buy back a few hours of my
life?” “No, madam, we don’t sell, we only buy.”
Maria was woken from her delirium by the sound of
screeching brakes, a motorist shouting, and a smiling old
gentleman, speaking English, telling her to step back onto the
pavement—the pedestrian light was red.
“But this can’t be exactly an earth-shattering discovery.
Everyone must feel what I feel. They must know.”
But they didn’t. She looked around her. People were
walking along, heads down, hurrying off to work, to school, to
the employment agency, to Rue de Berne, telling themselves:
“I can wait a little longer. I have a dream, but there’s no need
to realize it today, besides, I need to earn some money.” Of
course, everyone spoke ill of her profession, but, basically, it
was all a question of selling her time, like everyone else.
Doing things she didn’t want to do, like everyone else. Putting
up with horrible people, like everyone else. Handing over her
precious body and her precious soul in the name of a future
that never arrived, like everyone else. Saying that she still
didn’t have enough, like everyone else. Waiting just a little bit
longer, like everyone else. Waiting so that she could earn just a
little bit more, postponing the realization of her dreams; she
was too busy right now, she had a great opportunity ahead of
her, loyal clients who were waiting for her, who could pay
between three hundred and fifty and one thousand francs a
session.
And for the first time in her life, despite all the good things
she could buy with the money she might earn—who knows,
she might only have to work another year—she decided
consciously, lucidly and deliberately to let an opportunity pass
her by.
Maria waited for the light to change, she crossed the road
and paused in front of the floral clock; she thought of Ralf,
saw again the look of desire in his eyes on the night when she
had slipped off the top half of her dress, felt his hands
touching her breasts, her sex, her face, and she became wet;
and as she looked at the vast column of water in the distance,
without even having to touch any part of her own body, she
had an orgasm right there, in front of everyone.
Not that anyone noticed; they were all far too busy.
Nyah, the only one of her work colleagues with whom she had
a relationship that could be described as friendship, called her
over as soon as she came in. She was sitting with an oriental
gentleman, and they were both laughing.
“Look at this,” she said to Maria. “Look what he wants me
to do with him!”
The oriental gentleman gave a knowing look and, still
smiling, opened the lid of what looked like a cigar box. Milan
was watching from a distance in case it contained syringes or
drugs. It did not, it was something that even he didn’t know
quite what to do with, but it wasn’t anything very special.
“It looks like something from the last century!” said Maria.
“It is,” said the oriental gentleman indignantly. “It’s over a
hundred years old and it cost a fortune.”
What Maria saw was a series of valves, a handle, electric
circuits, small metal contacts and batteries. It looked like the
inside of an ancient radio, with two wires sticking out, at the
ends of which were small glass rods, about the thickness of a
finger. It certainly didn’t look like something that had cost a
fortune.
“How does it work?”
Nyah didn’t like Maria’s question. Although she trusted
Maria, people could change from one moment to the next, and
she might have her eye on her client.
“He’s already explained. It’s the Violet Rod.”
And turning to the oriental man, she suggested that they
leave, because she had decided to accept his invitation.
However, the man seemed pleased that his toy should have
aroused such interest.
“Around 1900, when the first batteries came onto the
market, traditional medicine started experimenting with
electricity to see if it could cure mental illness or hysteria. It
was also used to get rid of spots and to stimulate the skin. You
see these two ends? Well, they were placed here,” he indicated
his temples, “and the battery created the same sort of static
electricity that you get in Switzerland when the air’s very dry.”
Static electricity was something that never happened in
Brazil, but was very common in Switzerland. Maria had
discovered it one day when she opened the door of a taxi; she
had heard a crack and received a shock. She thought there
must be something wrong with the car and had complained,
saying that she wasn’t going to pay the fare, and the driver had
insulted her and told her she was stupid. He was right; it
wasn’t the car, it was the dry air. After receiving several more
shocks, she began to be afraid of touching anything made of
metal, until she discovered in a supermarket a bracelet she
could wear that discharged the electricity accumulated in the
body.
She turned to the man:
“But that’s really nasty.”
Nyah was getting more and more irritated by Maria’s
remarks. In order to avoid future conflicts with her only
possible friend, she kept her arm around the man’s shoulder,
thus leaving no room for doubt as to whom he belonged.
“It depends where you put it,” said the man, laughing
loudly.
He turned the little handle and the two rods seemed to turn
violet. He quickly placed them on the two women; there was a
crack, but the shock was more ticklish than painful.
Milan came over.
“Would you mind not using that in here, please.”
The man put the rods back inside the box. Nyah seized the
moment and suggested that they go straight to the hotel. The
man seemed rather disappointed, since the new arrival seemed
far more interested in his machine than the woman who was
now suggesting they go back to his hotel. He put on his jacket
and stowed the box away inside a leather briefcase, saying:
“They’ve started making them again now; they’ve become
quite fashionable amongst people in search of special
pleasures. But you’d only find ones like this in rare medical
collections, museums and antique shops.”
Milan and Maria just stood there, not knowing what to say.
“Have you ever seen one before?”
“Not like that, no. It probably did cost a fortune, but then
he’s a top executive with an oil company…. I’ve seen modern
ones, though.”
“What do they do with them?”
“The man puts them inside his body…and then asks the
woman to turn the handle. He gets an electric shock inside.”
“Couldn’t he do that on his own?”
“You can do most kinds of sexual activity on your own, but
if they stopped believing that it was more fun with another
person, my bar would go bankrupt and you would have to find
work in a greengrocer’s shop. By the way, your special client
said that he would be here tonight, so make sure you turn
down any other offers.”
“Oh, I will, including his. I came to say goodbye. I’m
leaving.”
Milan appeared not to react.
“Is it the painter?”
“No, it’s the Copacabana. There’s a limit to everything, and
I reached mine this morning when I was looking at that floral
clock near the lake.”
“And what is the limit?”
“The price of a farm in the interior of Brazil. I know I
could earn more money, that I could work for another year—
after all, what difference would it make?
“Well, I know what difference it would make; I would be
caught in this trap forever, just as you are and the clients are,
the businessmen, the air stewards, the talent scouts, the record
company executives, the many men I have known, to whom I
have sold my time and which they can’t sell back to me. If I
stay another day, I’ll be here for another year, and if I stay
another year, I’ll never leave.”
Milan nodded discreetly, as if he understood and agreed
with everything she had said, although he couldn’t actually say
anything, for fear of infecting all the other girls who worked
for him. He was a good man, and although he didn’t give her
his blessing, neither did he try to convince Maria that she was
wrong.
She thanked him and asked for a drink—a glass of
champagne, she couldn’t stand another fruit juice cocktail. She
could drink now that she wasn’t working. Milan told her to
phone him if ever she needed anything; she would always be
welcome.
She made to pay for the drink, and he said it was on the
house. She accepted: she had, after all, given that house a great
deal more than one drink.
From Maria’s diary, when she got home:
I don’t remember exactly when, but one Sunday recently, I
decided to go to church to attend mass. After some time, I
realized that I was in the wrong church—it was a Protestant
church.
I was about to leave, but the vicar was just beginning his
sermon, and I thought it would be rude to get up at that point,
and it was a real blessing, because that day I heard things I
very much needed to hear.
He said something like:
“In all the languages in the world, there is the same
proverb: ‘What the eyes don’t see, the heart doesn’t grieve
over.’ Well, I say that there isn’t an ounce of truth in it. The
further off they are, the closer to the heart are all those
feelings that we try to repress and forget. If we’re in exile, we
want to store away every tiny memory of our roots. If we’re far
from the person we love, everyone we pass in the street
reminds us of them.
“The gospels and all the sacred texts of all religions were
written in exile, in search of God’s understanding, of the faith
that moves whole peoples, of the pilgrimage of souls
wandering the face of the Earth. Our ancestors did not know,
as we do not know, what the Divinity expects from our lives—
and it is out of that doubt that books are written, pictures
painted, because we don’t want to forget who we are—nor can
we.”
At the end of the service, I went up to him and thanked him:
I said that I was a stranger in a strange land, and I thanked
him for reminding me that what the eyes don’t see, the heart
does grieve over. And my heart has grieved so much, that
today I’m leaving.
She picked up her two suitcases and put them on the bed; they
had always been there, waiting for the day when everything
would come to an end. She had imagined that she would fill
them with presents, new clothes, photographs of snow and of
the great European capitals, souvenirs of a happy time when
she had lived in the safest and most generous country in the
world. She had a few new clothes, it was true, and a few
photos taken in the snow that fell one day in Geneva, but apart
from that, nothing was as she had imagined it would be.
She had arrived with the dream of earning lots of money,
learning about life and who she was, buying a farm for her
parents, finding a husband, and bringing her family over to see
where she lived. She was returning with just enough money to
realize one of those dreams, without ever having visited the
mountains and, worse still, a stranger to herself. But she was
happy; she knew the time had come to stop.
Not many people do.
She had had only four adventures—being a dancer in a
cabaret, learning French, working as a prostitute and falling
hopelessly in love. How many people can boast of
experiencing so much excitement in one year? She was happy,
despite the sadness, and that sadness had a name: it wasn’t
prostitution, or Switzerland or money—it was Ralf Hart.
Although she had never acknowledged it to herself, deep
down, she would like to have married him, that man who was
now waiting for her in a church, ready to take her off to see his
friends, his paintings, his world.
She considered standing him up and getting a room in a
hotel near the airport, since the flight left early the next
morning; from now on, every minute spent by his side would
be a year of suffering in the future, for everything she could
have said to him and didn’t, for her memories of his hands, his
voice, his loving support, and his stories.
She opened one suitcase and took out the little carriage
from the electric train set that he had given her on that first
night in his house. She looked at it for a few minutes, then
threw it in the bin; it didn’t deserve to go to Brazil, and it had
proved useless and unfair to the child who had always wanted
it.
No, she wouldn’t go to the church; he might ask her
something about tomorrow, and if she was honest and told him
that she was leaving, he would beg her to stay and promise her
everything in order not to lose her at that moment, he would
openly declare all the love he had already shown to her during
the time they had spent together. But their relationship was
based on freedom, and no other sort of relationship would
work—perhaps that was the only reason they loved each other,
because they knew they did not need each other. Men always
take fright when a woman says: “I need you,” and Maria
wanted to take away with her the image of a Ralf Hart who
was utterly in love and utterly hers, and ready to do anything
for her.
She still had time to decide whether or not to go and meet
him; at the moment, she needed to concentrate on more
practical matters. She looked at all the things she couldn’t
pack and which she had no idea what to do with. She decided
that the owner could decide on their fate when he came to
check the apartment and found all the household appliances in
the kitchen, the pictures bought in a second-hand market, the
towels and the bedclothes. She couldn’t take any of that with
her to Brazil, even though her parents had more need of them
than any Swiss beggar; they would always remind her of
everything she had risked.
She left the apartment and went to the bank and asked to
withdraw all her money. The manager—who had been to bed
with her in the past—said that this really wasn’t a good idea,
since her francs would continue earning money and she could
receive the interest in Brazil. Besides, what if she were
mugged, that would mean months of work wasted. Maria
hesitated for a moment, thinking—as she always did—that he
really was trying to help. However, after reflecting for a
moment, she concluded that the point of the money was not
that it should be transformed into more paper, but into a farm,
a home for her parents, a few cattle and a lot more work.
She withdrew every last centime, put it in a small bag she
had bought specially for the occasion and attached it to a belt
beneath her clothes.
She went to the travel agency, praying that she would have
the courage to go through with her decision. When she said
she wanted to get a different flight, she was told that if she
went on tomorrow’s flight, she would have to change planes in
Paris. That didn’t matter—all she needed was to get far
enough away from there before she had second thoughts.
She walked to one of the bridges and bought an ice cream,
even though the weather had started to get cold again, and she
took one last look at Geneva. Everything seemed different to
her, as if she had just arrived and needed to visit the museums,
the historical monuments, the fashionable bars and restaurants.
It’s odd how, when you live in a city, you always postpone
getting to know it and usually end up never knowing it at all.
She thought she would feel happy because she was going
home, but she wasn’t. She thought she would feel sad because
she was leaving a city that had treated her so well, but she
didn’t. The only thing she could do now was to shed a few
tears, feeling rather afraid of herself, an intelligent young
woman, who had everything going for her, but who tended to
make the wrong decisions.
She just hoped that this time she was right.
The church was completely empty when she went in, and she
was able to examine in silence the splendid stained-glass
windows, lit from outside by the light of a day washed clean
by last night’s storm. Before her stood an empty cross; she was
confronted not by an instrument of torture, by the bloodied
body of a dying man, but by a symbol of resurrection, in
which the instrument of torture had lost all its meaning, its
terror, its importance. She remembered the whip on that night
of thunder and lightning; it was the same thing. “Dear God,
what am I saying?”
She was pleased too not to see any images of suffering
saints, covered in bloodstains and open wounds—this was
simply a place where people gathered to worship something
they could not understand.
She stood in front of the monstrance, in which was kept the
body of a Jesus in whom she still believed, although she had
not thought about him for a long time. She knelt down and
promised God, the Virgin, Jesus and all the saints that
whatever happened that day, she would not change her mind
and would leave anyway. She made this promise because she
knew love’s traps all too well, and knew how easily they can
change a woman’s mind.
Shortly afterwards, she felt a hand touch her shoulder and
she inclined her head so that her face rested on the hand.
“How are you?”
“I’m fine,” she said in a voice without a trace of anxiety in
it. “I’m fine. Let’s go and have a coffee.”
They left the church hand-in-hand, as if they were two
lovers meeting again after a long time. They kissed in public,
and a few people shot them scandalized looks; but they both
smiled at the unease they were causing and at the desires they
were provoking by their scandalous behavior, because they
knew that, in fact, those people wished they could be doing the
same thing. That was the real scandal.
They went into a café which was the same as all the others,
but that afternoon, it was different, because they were there
together and because they loved each other. They talked about
Geneva, the difficulties of the French language, the stainedglass windows in the church, the evils of smoking—both of
them smoked and hadn’t the slightest intention of giving up.
She insisted on paying for the coffee and he accepted. They
went to the exhibition and she got to know his world: the
artists, the rich who looked richer than they actually were, the
millionaires who looked poor, the people discussing things she
had never even heard about. They all liked her and praised her
French; they asked about Carnival, football, Brazilian music.
They were nice, polite, kind, charming.
When they left, he said that he would come to the club that
night to see her. She asked him not to, she had the night off
and would like to invite him out to supper.
He accepted and they said goodbye, arranging to meet at
his house before going to have supper at a delightful restaurant
in the little square in Cologny, which they had often driven
past in the taxi, and where she had always wanted to stop, but
had never asked to.
Then Maria remembered her one friend and decided to go
to the library to tell her that she would not be coming back.
She got caught up in the traffic for what seemed like an
eternity, until the Kurds had (once more!) finished their
demonstration and the cars could move freely again. Now,
however, she was the mistress of her own time, and it didn’t
matter.
By the time she reached the library, it was just about to
close.
“Forgive me if I’m being too personal, but I haven’t anyone
else, any woman friend, I can talk to about certain things,”
said the librarian as soon as Maria came in.
She didn’t have any women friends? After spending her
whole life in the same place and meeting all kinds of people at
work, did she really have no one she could talk to? Maria had
found someone like herself, or, rather, like everyone else.
“I was thinking about what I read about the clitoris…”
Didn’t she ever think about anything else!
“It’s just that, although I used to enjoy sex with my
husband, I always found it very difficult to reach orgasm
during intercourse. Do you think that’s normal?”
“Do you find it normal that there are daily demonstrations
by Kurds? That women in love run away from their Prince
Charming? That people dream about farms rather than love?
That men and women sell their time, but can never buy it back
again? And yet, all these things happen, so it really doesn’t
matter what I believe or don’t believe; all these things are
normal. Everything that goes against Nature, against our most
intimate desires, is normal in our eyes, even though it’s an
aberration in God’s eyes. We seek out our own inferno, we
spend millennia building it, and after all that effort, we are
now able to live in the worst possible way.”
She looked at the woman standing in front of her and, for
the first time, she asked what her name was (she only knew
her surname). Her name was Heidi, she was married for thirty
years and never—never!—during that time had she asked
herself if it was normal not to have an orgasm during
intercourse with her husband.
“I don’t know if I should have read all those things!
Perhaps it would have been better to live in ignorance,
believing that a faithful husband, an apartment with a view of
the lake, three children and a job in the public sector were all
that a woman could hope for. Now, ever since you arrived, and
since I read the first book, I’m obsessed with what my life has
become. Is everyone the same?”
“I can guarantee you that they are.” And standing before
that woman who was asking her advice, Maria felt herself to
be very wise.
“Would you like me to give you details?”
Maria nodded.
“You’re obviously too young to understand these things,
but that’s precisely why I would like to share a little of my life
with you, so that you don’t make the same mistakes I did.
“But why is it that my husband never noticed my clitoris?
He assumed that the orgasm happened in the vagina, and I
found it really, really difficult to pretend something that he
imagined I must be feeling. Of course, I did experience
pleasure, but a different kind of pleasure. It was only when the
friction was on the upper part…do you know what I mean?”
“I know.”
“And now I know why. It’s in there,” she pointed to a book
on her desk, whose title Maria couldn’t see. “There are lots of
nerve endings that connect the clitoris and the G-spot and
which are crucial to orgasm. But men think that penetration is
all. Do you know what the G-spot is?”
“Yes, we talked about it the other day,” said Maria, slipping
into the role of Innocent Girl. “As you go in, on the first floor,
the back window.”
“That’s right!” And the librarian’s eyes lit up. “Just you ask
how many of your male friends have heard of it. None of
them! It’s absurd. But just as an Italian discovered the clitoris,
the G-spot is a twentieth-century discovery! Soon it will be in
all the headlines, and then no one will be able to ignore it any
longer! Have you any idea what revolutionary times we’re
living in?”
Maria glanced at her watch, and Heidi realized that she
would have to talk fast, in order to teach this pretty young
woman that all women have the right to be happy and fulfilled,
in order that the next generation should benefit from all these
extraordinary scientific discoveries.
“Dr. Freud didn’t agree because he wasn’t a woman and,
since he experienced his orgasm through his penis, he felt that
women must, therefore, experience pleasure in their vagina.
We’ve got to go back to basics, to what has always given us
pleasure: the clitoris and the G-spot! Very few women enjoy a
satisfactory sexual relationship, so if you have difficulty in
getting the pleasure you deserve, let me suggest something:
change position. Make your lover lie down and you stay on
top; your clitoris will strike his body harder and you—not he
—will be getting the stimulus you need. Or, rather, the
stimulus you deserve!”
Maria, meanwhile, was only pretending that she wasn’t
listening to the conversation. So she wasn’t the only one! She
didn’t have a sexual problem, it was all just a question of
anatomy! She felt like kissing the librarian, as if a gigantic
weight had been lifted off her heart. How good to have
discovered this while she was still young! What a marvelous
day she was having! Heidi gave a conspiratorial smile.
“They may not know it, but we have an erection too. The
clitoris becomes erect!”
“They” presumably meant men. Since this was such an
intimate conversation, Maria decided to risk a question:
“Have you ever had an affair?”
The librarian looked shocked. Her eyes gave off a kind of
sacred fire, she blushed scarlet, though whether out of rage or
shame it was impossible to tell. After a while, though, the
battle between telling the truth or pretending ended. She
simply changed the subject.
“Getting back to our erection, to our clitoris, did you know
that it became rigid?”
“Yes, I’ve known that ever since I was a child.”
Heidi seemed disappointed. Perhaps she had just never
noticed. Nevertheless, she resolved to go on:
“Anyway, apparently, if you rub your finger around it,
without touching the actual tip, you can experience even more
intense pleasure. So take note! Men who do respect a woman’s
body immediately touch the tip, not knowing that this can
sometimes be quite painful, don’t you agree? So, after your
first or second encounter, take control of the situation: get on
top, decide how and when pressure should be applied, and
increase and decrease the rhythm as you see fit. According to
the book I’m reading, a frank conversation about it might also
be a good idea.”
“Did you ever have a frank conversation with your
husband?”
Again, Heidi avoided this direct question, saying that
things were different then. Now she was more interested in
sharing her intellectual experiences.
“Try to think of your clitoris as the hands of a clock and ask
your partner to move it back and forth between eleven and
one, do you understand?”
Yes, she knew what the woman was talking about and
didn’t entirely agree, although the book wasn’t far from the
truth. As soon as she mentioned the word “clock,” though,
Maria glanced at her watch, and explained that she had really
come to say goodbye, her job placement had come to an end.
The woman seemed not to hear her.
“Would you like to borrow this book about the clitoris?”
“No, thanks. I’ve got other things to think about at the
moment.”
“And you don’t want to borrow anything else?”
“No. I’m going back to my own country, but I just wanted
to thank you for always having treated me with such respect
and understanding. Perhaps we’ll meet again some time.”
They shook hands and wished each other much happiness.
Heidi waited until the girl had left, then thumped the desk.
Why hadn’t she seized the opportunity to share something
which, the way things were going, would probably go to the
grave with her? Since the girl had had the courage to ask if she
had ever betrayed her husband, why had she not answered,
now that she was discovering a new world in which women
were finally acknowledging how difficult it was to achieve a
vaginal orgasm?
“Oh well, it doesn’t matter. The world isn’t just about sex.”
No, it wasn’t the most important thing in the world, but it
was still important. She looked around her; most of the
thousands of books surrounding her were love stories. It was
always the same: someone meets someone, falls in love, loses
them and finds them again. There are souls speaking unto
souls, there are distant places, adventures, sufferings,
anxieties, but very rarely anyone saying: “Excuse me, sir, but
why don’t you try acquiring a better understanding of the
female body?” Why didn’t books talk openly about that?
Perhaps people weren’t really interested. Men would
always go looking for novelty; they were still the troglodyte
hunter, obeying the reproductive instinct of the human race.
And what about women? In her personal experience, the desire
to have a good orgasm with one’s partner lasted only for the
first few years; then the frequency of orgasms diminished, but
no one talked about it, because every woman thought it was
her problem alone. And so they lied, pretending that they
found their husband’s desire to make love every night
oppressive. And by lying, they left other women feeling
worried.
They turned their thoughts to other things: children,
cooking, timetables, housework, bills to pay, their husband’s
affairs—which they tolerated—holidays abroad during which
they were more concerned with their children than with
themselves, their complicity, or even love, but no sex.
She should have been more open with that young Brazilian
woman, who seemed to her an innocent creature, old enough
to be her daughter, and still incapable of understanding what
the world was like. An immigrant, far from home, working
hard at a boring job, waiting for a man she could marry, and
with whom she could fake a few orgasms, find security,
reproduce this mysterious human race, and then forget all
about such things as orgasms, the clitoris or the G-spot (which
was only discovered in the twentieth century!!). Being a good
wife, a good mother, making sure there was nothing lacking in
the home, masturbating occasionally in secret, thinking about
some man who had passed her in the street and looked at her
longingly. Keeping up appearances—why was the world so
concerned with appearances?
That is why she had not replied to the question: “Have you
ever had an affair?”
These things go with you to the grave, she thought. Her
husband had been the only man in her life, although sex was
now a thing of the remote past. He had been an excellent
companion, honest, generous and good-humoured, and had
struggled to bring up the family and to keep all those who
worked with him happy. He was the ideal man that all women
dream of, and that is precisely why she felt so bad when she
thought of how she had one day desired and been with another
man.
She remembered how they had met. She was coming back
from the small mountain town of Davos, when all the train
services were interrupted for some hours by an avalanche. She
phoned home so that no one would be worried, bought a few
magazines and prepared for a long wait at the station.
That was when she noticed the man sitting next to her,
along with his rucksack and sleeping bag. He had graying hair
and sunburned skin, and was the only person in the station
who didn’t seem concerned about the absence of any trains; on
the contrary, he was smiling and looking around him for
someone to talk to. Heidi opened one of the magazines, but—
ah, sweet mystery of life!—her eyes happened to catch his and
she didn’t manage to look away quickly enough to avoid him
coming over to her.
Before she could—politely—say that she really needed to
finish reading an important article, he began to talk. He told
her that he was a writer and was returning from a meeting in
Davos and that the delay would mean him missing his flight
home. When they got to Geneva, would she mind helping him
find a hotel?
Heidi was watching him: how could anyone be so cheerful
about missing a plane and having to wait in an uncomfortable
train station until things were sorted out?
The man began talking to her as if they were old friends.
He told her about his travels, about the mystique of literary
creation and, to her horror, about all the women he had known
and loved in his lifetime. Heidi merely nodded and let him
talk. Occasionally he would apologize for talking so much and
ask her to tell him something about herself, but all she could
say was: “Oh, I’m just an ordinary person, nothing very
special.”
Suddenly, she found herself hoping that the train would
never arrive; the conversation was so enthralling; she was
discovering things that she had only encountered before in
fiction. And since she would never see him again, she got up
her nerve and (quite why she could never say) began asking
him about subjects of particular interest to her. Her marriage
was going through a rough patch, her husband was very
demanding of her time, and Heidi wanted to know what she
could do to make him happy. The man offered her some
interesting explanations, told her a story, but didn’t seem very
comfortable talking about her husband.
“You’re a very interesting woman,” he said, something that
no one had said to her for years.
Heidi didn’t know how to react; he saw her embarrassment
and immediately started talking about deserts, mountains, lost
cities, women with veiled faces or bare midriffs, about
warriors, pirates and wise men.
The train arrived. They sat down next to each other, and she
was no longer a married woman who lived in a chalet looking
out over the lake and had three children to bring up, she was
an adventurer arriving in Geneva for the first time. She looked
at the mountains and the river and felt glad to be sitting beside
a man who wanted to go to bed with her (because that’s all
men think about) and who was doing his best to impress her.
She wondered how many other men had felt the same, but to
whom she had never given the slightest encouragement; that
morning, however, the world had changed, and she was
suddenly a thirty-eight-year-old adolescent, dazzled by this
man’s attempts to seduce her; it was the best feeling in the
world.
In the premature autumn of her life, when she thought she
had everything she could possibly want, this man appeared at
the train station and walked straight into her life without first
asking permission. They got off at Geneva and she showed
him a hotel (a cheap one, he said, because he should have left
that morning and didn’t have much money on him for another
night in exorbitantly expensive Switzerland); he asked her to
go up to the room with him, to see if everything was in order.
Heidi knew what to expect, and nevertheless, she accepted his
proposal. They shut the door, they kissed each other with wild
abandon, he tore off her clothes and—dear God!—he knew all
about the female body, because he had known the sufferings
and frustrations of so many women.
They made love all afternoon and only when evening fell
did the charm dissipate, and she said the words she would
have preferred not to have said:
“I must go home, my husband’s expecting me.”
He lit a cigarette and they lay in silence for a few moments,
and neither of them said “goodbye.” Heidi got up and left
without looking back, knowing that, whatever either of them
might say, no word or phrase would make any sense.
She would never see him again, but, for a few hours, in the
autumn of her despair, she had ceased to be a faithful wife,
housewife, loving mother, exemplary public servant and
constant friend, and reverted to being simply a woman.
For a few days, her husband kept saying that she seemed
different, either happier or sadder, he couldn’t quite put his
finger on it. A week later, everything was back to normal.
“What a shame I didn’t tell that young woman,” she
thought. “Not that she would have understood, she still lives in
a world in which people are faithful and vows of love are
forever.”
From Maria’s diary:
I don’t know what he must have thought when he opened the
door that night and saw me standing there, carrying two
suitcases.
“Don’t worry,” I said. “I’m not moving in. Shall we go to
supper?”
He didn’t say anything, just helped me in with my luggage.
Then, without saying “what’s going on?” or “how lovely to
see you,” he simply put his arms around me and started
kissing me and touching my body, my breasts, my crotch, as if
he had been waiting for this a long time and was now afraid
that the moment would never come.
He pulled off my jacket and my dress, leaving me naked,
and there in the hall, without any ritual or preparation,
without even time to say what would be good and what bad,
with the cold wind blowing in under the front door, we made
love for the first time. I thought perhaps I should tell him to
stop, so that we could find somewhere more comfortable, so
that we could have time to explore the immense world of our
sensuality, but, at the same time, I wanted him inside me,
because he was the man I had never possessed and would
never possess again. That is why I could love him with all my
energy, and have, at least for one night, what I’d never had
before and what I would possibly never have again.
He lay me down on the floor and entered me before I was
aroused and ready, but the pain didn’t bother me; on the
contrary, I liked it like that, because he obviously understood
that I was his and that he didn’t need to ask permission. I
wasn’t there in order to teach him anything or to prove that I
was more sensitive or more passionate than other women, I
was there to say yes, you’re welcome, that I too had been
waiting for this, that I was pleased about his total disregard
for the rules we had created between us and that he was now
demanding that we should be guided solely by our instincts,
male and female.
We were in the most conventional of positions—me
underneath him, with my legs spread, and him on top of me,
moving in and out, while I looked at him, with no desire to
pretend or to moan or to do anything, just wanting to keep my
eyes open so that I could remember every second, watch his
face changing, his hands grabbing my hair, his mouth biting
me, kissing me. No preliminaries, no caresses, no
preparations, no sophistication, just him inside me and me
inside his soul.
He came and went, quickening and slowing the rhythm,
stopping sometimes to look at me too, but he didn’t ask if I was
enjoying it, because he knew that this was the only way our
souls could communicate at that moment. The rhythm
increased, and I knew that the eleven minutes were coming to
an end, and I wanted them to last forever, because it was so
good—ah, dear God, it was good—to be possessed and not to
possess! And we had our eyes wide open all the time, until I
noticed that at one point we were no longer seeing clearly
anymore and we seemed to move into a dimension in which I
was the great mother, the universe, the beloved, the sacred
prostitute of the ancient rituals that he had told me about over
wine and beside an open fire. I saw that he was about to come,
and his arms gripped mine, his movements increased in
intensity, and it was then that he shouted—he didn’t moan, he
didn’t grind his teeth, he shouted. He yelled. He roared like an
animal! A thought flashed through my mind that the neighbors
might call the police, but it didn’t matter, and I felt immense
pleasure, because this was how it had been since the
beginning of time, when the first man met the first woman and
they made love for the first time: they shouted.
Then his body collapsed onto mine, and I don’t know how
long we stayed there, our arms around each other; I stroked
his hair as I had done only once before, on the night when we
locked ourselves up in the darkness of the hotel room; I felt his
racing heart gradually slow to its normal rate; his hands
began delicately to move up and down my arms, making all
the hairs on my body prickle.
He must have had a practical thought—the weight of his
body on mine—because he rolled over, took my hand, and we
lay there staring up at the ceiling and the chandelier with its
three light bulbs lit.
“Good evening,” I said.
He drew me over so that my head was resting on his chest.
For a long time, he just stroked me, and then he said “Good
evening” too.
“The neighbors must have heard everything,” I said, not
knowing quite what to say next, because saying “I love you”
at that juncture didn’t make much sense; he knew that already,
and so did I.
“There’s a terrific draft from under the door,” he said,
when he could have said: “Good!”
“Let’s go into the kitchen.”
We got up and I saw that he hadn’t even taken off his
trousers, he was dressed just as I had found him, only with his
penis exposed. I put my jacket over my bare shoulders. We
went into the kitchen; he made some coffee; he smoked two
cigarettes and I smoked one. Sitting at the table, he said
“thank you” with his eyes, and I replied “thank you too,” but
our mouths remained shut.
He eventually got up the courage to ask about the
suitcases.
“I’m flying back to Brazil tomorrow at midday.”
A woman knows when a man is important to her. Are men
capable of that kind of realization? Or would I have to say: “I
love you,” “I’d like to stay here with you,” “Ask me to stay.”
“Don’t go.” Yes, he had understood that he could say that
to me.
“I have to. I made a promise.”
Because, if I hadn’t, he might think that this was all going
to last forever. And it wasn’t; it was part of the dream of a
young woman from the interior of a far-off country, who goes
to the big city (well, not that big really), encounters all kinds
of difficulties, but finds the man who loves her. So this was the
happy ending to all the difficult times I had been through, and
whenever I remembered my life in Europe, I would end with
the story of a man passionately in love with me, and who
would always be mine, because I had visited his soul.
Ah, Ralf, you have no idea how much I love you. I think
that perhaps we always fall in love the very first instant we see
the man of our dreams, even though, at the time, reason may
be telling us otherwise, and we may fight against that instinct,
hoping against hope that we won’t win, until there comes a
point when we allow ourselves to be vanquished by our
feelings. That happened on the night when I walked barefoot
in the park, cold and in pain, but knowing how much you loved
me.
Yes, I love you very much, as I have never loved another
man, and that is precisely why I am leaving, because, if I
stayed, the dream would become reality, the desire to possess,
to want your life to be mine…in short, all the things that
transform love into slavery. It’s best left like this—a dream. We
have to be careful what we take from a country, or from life.
“You didn’t have an orgasm,” he said, trying to change the
subject, to be careful and not to force the situation. He was
afraid of losing me, and was thinking that he still had all night
to make me change my mind.
“No, I didn’t, but I had an enormous amount of pleasure.”
“But it would have been better if you’d had an orgasm too.”
“I could have pretended, just to please you, but you don’t
deserve that. Ralf Hart, you are a man in the most beautiful,
intense sense of the word. You’ve supported me and helped me,
you’ve let me support and help you, without there being any
humiliation on either side. Yes, it would have been good to
have an orgasm, but I didn’t. But I loved the cold floor, your
warm body, the force with which you entered me.
“I went to take back my library books today, and the
librarian asked if I talked to my partner about sex. I felt like
saying: Which partner? What sort of sex do you mean? But
she didn’t deserve that; she’s always been so sweet to me.
“I’ve really only had two partners since I came to Geneva:
one who awoke the worst in me, because I let him and even
begged him to. The other one, you, who made me feel part of
the world again. I would like to be able to teach you where to
touch my body, how much pressure to apply, for how long, and
I know you would take this not as a criticism, but as another
way to improve communication between our souls. The art of
love is like your painting, it requires technique, patience, and,
above all, practice by the couple. It requires boldness, the
courage to go beyond what people conventionally call ‘making
love.’”
The teacher in me was back, and I didn’t want that, but Ralf
knew how to take control of the situation. Instead of agreeing
with me, he lit his third cigarette in less than half an hour and
said:
“Firstly, you’re staying here tonight.”
It wasn’t a request, it was an order.
“Secondly, we’re going to make love again, but with less
anxiety this time and more desire. And finally, I’d like you to
understand men better too.”
Understand men better? I spent every night with them,
whites, blacks, Asians, Jews, Muslims, Catholics, Buddhists.
Didn’t Ralf know that?
I felt lighter; I was so pleased that the conversation had
shifted into being a discussion. At one point, I even considered
asking God’s forgiveness and breaking my promise. But reality
returned, telling me to remember to preserve my dream intact
and not to fall into destiny’s traps.
“Yes, to understand men better,” said Ralf again, seeing the
doubtful look on my face. “You talk about your female
sexuality, about helping me to find my way around your body,
to be patient, to take time. I agree, but has it occurred to you
that we’re different, at least in matters of time? You should
complain to God about that.
“When we met, I asked you to teach me about sex, because
I had lost all my sexual desire. Do you know why? Because
after a certain age, every sexual relationship I had ended in
tedium and frustration, because I realized how difficult it was
to give the women I loved the same amount of pleasure they
gave me.”
I didn’t like the sound of “the women I loved,” but I feigned
indifference and lit a cigarette.
“I didn’t have the courage to ask: show me your body. But
when I met you, I saw your light, and I loved you at once, and
I thought that, at this stage in my life, I had nothing to lose by
being honest with myself and with the woman I wanted to have
by my side.”
My cigarette tasted delicious, and I would have liked him to
offer me some wine, but I didn’t want to break the thread of the
conversation.
“Why is it that men only think about sex? instead of doing
as you did with me and finding out how I feel?”
Who said we only think about sex? On the contrary, we
spend years of our life trying to convince ourselves that sex is
actually important to us. We learn about love from prostitutes
or virgins; we tell our stories to whoever will listen; when we
are older, we parade about with much younger lovers, just to
prove to others that we really are what women expect us to be.
“But do you know something? That’s simply not true. We
understand nothing. We think that sex and ejaculation are the
same thing and, as you just said, they’re not. We don’t learn
because we haven’t the courage to say to the woman: show me
your body. We don’t learn because the woman doesn’t have the
courage to say: this is what I like. We are stuck with our
primitive survival instincts, and that’s that. Absurd though it
may seem, do you know what is more important than sex for a
man?”
I thought it might be money or power, but I said nothing.
“Sport. Because a man can understand another man’s body.
We can see that sport is a dialogue between two bodies that
understand each other.”
“You’re mad.”
“Maybe. But it makes sense. Have you ever stopped to think
about the feelings of the men you’ve been to bed with?”
“Yes, I have. They were all insecure. They were all afraid.”
“Worse than afraid, they were vulnerable. They didn’t
really know what they were doing, they only knew what
society, friends and women themselves had told them was
important. Sex, sex, sex, that’s the basis of life, scream the
advertisements, other people, films, books. No one knows what
they’re talking about. Since instinct is stronger than all of us,
all they know is that it has to be done. And that’s that.”
Enough. I had tried to give him lessons in sex in order to
protect myself, now he was doing the same, and however wise
our words—because each of us was always trying to impress
the other—this was so stupid and so unworthy of our
relationship! I drew him to me because—regardless of what he
had to say or of what I thought about myself—life had taught
me many things. In the beginning, everything was love and
surrender. But then the serpent appeared and said to Eve:
what you surrendered, you will lose. That is how it was with
me—I was driven out of paradise when I was still at school,
and ever since then, I have been trying to find a way of telling
the serpent he was wrong, that living was more important than
keeping things to yourself. But the serpent was right and I was
wrong.
I knelt down and gradually took off his clothes, and I saw
his penis there, sleeping and unresponsive. This didn’t seem to
bother him, and I kissed the inner part of his legs, starting at
his feet. His penis slowly began to respond, and I touched it,
then put it in my mouth and—unhurriedly, so that he wouldn’t
interpret this as: “right, get ready for action!”—I kissed it
with all the tenderness of someone who expects nothing in
return, and for precisely that reason I got everything I wanted.
I saw that he was getting excited, and he began to touch my
nipples, circling them with his fingers as he had on that night
of total darkness, making me want to have him again between
my legs or in my mouth or whatever way he wanted to possess
me.
He didn’t take off my jacket; he had me lie face forwards,
with the upper part of my body bent over the table, and my feet
still on the floor. He penetrated me slowly and unhurriedly this
time, no longer afraid of losing me, because, deep down, no
longer afraid of losing me, because, deep down, he too had
realized that this was a dream and that it would always be a
dream, and would never become reality.
At the same time as I felt him inside me, I was aware of his
hand on my breasts, my buttocks, touching me as only a
woman knows how. Then I knew that we were made for each
other, because he could be a woman, as he was now, and I
could be a man, as when we talked or when we initiated that
joint search for the two lost souls, the two missing fragments
needed to complete the universe.
As he simultaneously penetrated and touched me, I felt that
he was doing this not only to me, but to the whole universe. We
had time, tenderness and mutual knowledge. Yes, it had been
good to arrive carrying two suitcases, ready to leave, and to
be immediately thrown to the floor and penetrated with a kind
of fearful urgency; but it was good too knowing that the night
would never end and that there, on the kitchen table, orgasm
wasn’t a goal in itself, but the beginning of that encounter.
He stopped moving inside me while his fingers worked
quickly and I had one, two, three orgasms in a row. I felt like
pushing him away, for the pain of pleasure is so intense that it
hurts, but I resisted; I accepted that this was how it was, that I
could withstand another orgasm or another two, or even
more…
…and suddenly, a kind of light exploded inside me. I was
no longer myself, but a being infinitely superior to everything I
knew. When his hand took me to my fourth orgasm, I entered a
place where everything seemed at peace, and with my fifth
orgasm I knew God. Then I felt him beginning to move inside
me again, although his hand had still not stopped, and I said
“Oh God,” and surrendered to whatever came next, Heaven
or Hell.
It was Heaven. I was the earth, the mountains, the tigers,
the rivers that flowed into the lakes, the lakes that became the
sea. He was thrusting faster and faster now, and the pain was
mingled with pleasure, and I could have said: “I can’t take any
more,” but that would have been unfair, because, by then, he
and I were one person.
I allowed him to penetrate me for as long as it took; his
nails were now digging into my buttocks, and there I was face
down on the kitchen table, thinking that there wasn’t a better
place in the world to make love. Again the creak of the table,
his breathing growing ever faster, his nails bruising me, my
sex beating hard against his, flesh, against flesh, bone against
bone, and I was about to have another orgasm, and so was he,
and none of this, absolutely none of this was a LIE!
“Come on!”
He knew what he was saying, and I knew that this was the
moment; I felt my whole body soften, I ceased to be myself—I
was no longer listening, seeing or tasting anything—I was
merely feeling.
“Come on!”
And I came at the same moment he came. It wasn’t eleven
minutes, it was an eternity, it was as if we had both left our
bodies and were walking joyfully through the gardens of
paradise in understanding and friendship. I was woman and
man, he was man and woman. I don’t know how long it lasted,
but everything seemed to be silent, at prayer, as if the universe
and life had ceased to exist and become transformed into
something sacred, nameless and timeless.
But time returned, I heard his shouts and I shouted with
him, the table legs beat on the floor, and it didn’t occur to
either of us to wonder what the rest of the world might be
thinking.
And suddenly he withdrew from me and laughed; I felt my
vagina contract, and I turned to him and I laughed too, and we
embraced as if it were the first time we had made love in our
entire lives.
“Bless me,” he said.
I blessed him, not really knowing what I was doing. I asked
him to do the same, and he did, saying, “blessed be this
woman, who has loved much.” They were beautiful words, and
we embraced again and stayed there, unable to understand
how eleven minutes could carry a man and a woman so far.
Neither of us was tired. We went into the living room, he
put on a record and did exactly as I had hoped: he lit the fire
and poured me some wine. Then he opened a book and read:
A time to be born, and a time to die;
A time to plant, and a time to pluck up that which is planted;
A time to kill, and a time to heal;
A time to break down, and a time to build up;
A time to weep, and a time to laugh;
A time to mourn, and a time to dance;
A time to cast away stones, and a time to gather stones
together;
A time to embrace, and a time to refrain from embracing;
A time to get, and a time to lose;
A time to keep, and a time to cast away;
A time to rend, and a time to sew;
A time to keep silence, and a time to speak;
A time to love, and a time to hate;
A time of war, and a time of peace.
This sounded like a farewell, but it was the loveliest farewell I
would ever experience in my life.
I embraced him and he embraced me, and we lay down on
the carpet beside the fire. I was still filled by a sense of
plenitude, as if I had always been a wise, happy, fulfilled
woman.
“What made you fall in love with a prostitute?”
“I didn’t understand it myself at the time. But I’ve thought
about it since, and I think it was because, knowing that your
body would never be mine alone, I had to concentrate on
conquering your soul.”
“Weren’t you jealous?”
“You can’t say to the spring: ‘Come now and last as long as
possible.’ You can only say: ‘Come and bless me with your
hope, and stay as long as you can.’”
Words lost on the wind. But I needed to hear them, and he
needed to say them. I fell asleep, although I don’t know when. I
dreamed, not of a situation or of a person, but of a perfume
that flooded the air.
When Maria opened her eyes, a few rays of sun were coming
in through the open blinds.
“I’ve made love with him twice,” she thought, looking at
the man asleep by her side. “And yet it’s as if we had always
been together, and he had always known my life, my soul, my
body, my light, my pain.”
She got up to go to the kitchen and make some coffee. That
was when she saw the two suitcases in the hall and she
remembered everything: her promise, the prayer she had said
in the church, her life, the dream that insisted on becoming
reality and losing its charm, the perfect man, the love in which
body and soul were one and the same and in which pleasure
and orgasm were different things.
She could stay; she had nothing more to lose, only an
illusion. She remembered the poem: a time to weep, and a time
to laugh.
But there was another line too: “a time to embrace, and a
time to refrain from embracing.” She made the coffee, shut the
kitchen door and phoned for a taxi. She summoned all her
willpower, which had carried her so far, and which was the
source of energy for her “light,” which had told her the exact
time to leave, which was protecting her and making her
treasure forever the memory of that night. She got dressed,
picked up her suitcases and left, hoping against hope that he
would wake up and ask her to stay.
But he didn’t wake up. While she was waiting for the taxi
outside, a gypsy was passing, carrying bouquets of flowers.
“Would you like to buy one?”
Maria bought one; it was the sign that autumn had arrived
and summer had been left behind. It would be a long time now
before the café tables were out on the pavements in Geneva
and the parks were full once more of people strolling about
and sunbathing. It didn’t matter; she was leaving because she
had chosen to leave, and there was no reason for regrets.
She got to the airport, drank another cup of coffee and waited
four hours for her flight to Paris, thinking all the time that he
would arrive at any moment, because at some point before
they fell asleep, she had told him the time of her flight. That’s
how it always happened in films: at the last moment, when the
woman is just about to board the plane, the man races up to
her, puts his arms around her and kisses her, and brings her
back to his world, beneath the smiling, indulgent gaze of the
flight staff. The words “The End” appear on the screen, and
the audience knows that, from then on, they will live happily
ever after.
“Films never tell you what happens next,” she thought,
trying to console herself. Marriage, cooking, children, ever
more infrequent sex, the discovery of the first note from his
mistress, the decision to confront him, his promise that it will
never happen again, the second note from another mistress,
another confrontation and this time a threat to leave him, this
time the man reacts less vehemently and merely tells her that
he loves her. The third note from a third mistress, and the
decision to say nothing, to pretend that she knows nothing,
because he might tell her that he doesn’t love her anymore and
that she’s free to leave.
No, films never show that. They finish before the real
world begins. It’s best not to think too much about it.
She read one, two, three magazines. In the end, they
announced her flight, after almost an eternity in that airport
lounge, and she got on the plane. She still imagined the
famous scene in which, as she fastens her seatbelt, she feels a
hand on her shoulder, turns around and there he is, smiling at
her.
Nothing happened.
She slept on the short flight between Geneva and Paris. She
hadn’t had time to think about what she would tell them at
home, what story she would invent, but her parents would
probably just be happy to have their daughter back, and to
have a farm and a comfortable old age ahead of them.
She woke up with the jolt of the plane landing. It taxied for
a long time, and the flight attendant came to tell her that she
would have to change terminals, because the flight to Brazil
left from Terminal F and she was in Terminal C. But there was
no need to worry; there were no delays, and she still had
plenty of time, and if she wasn’t sure where to go, the ground
staff would help her.
While the passenger loading bridge was being put in place,
she wondered if it would be worth spending a day in Paris, just
to take some photographs and be able to tell people that she
had been there. She needed time to think, to be alone with
herself, to bury her memories of last night deep down inside
her, so that she could use them whenever she needed to feel
alive. Yes, a day in Paris was an excellent idea; she asked the
flight attendant when the next flight to Brazil was, if she
decided not to leave that day.
The flight attendant asked to see her ticket and said that,
unfortunately, it didn’t allow for that kind of stopover. Maria
consoled herself with the thought that visiting such a beautiful
city all on her own would only depress her. She was still
managing to cling on to her sangfroid, to her willpower, and
didn’t want to ruin it all by seeing a beautiful view and
missing someone intensely.
She got off the plane and went through the security checks;
her luggage would go straight on to the next plane, so she
didn’t have to bother with that. The doors opened, the
passengers emerged and embraced whoever was waiting for
them, wife, mother, children. Maria pretended not to notice, at
the same time pondering her own loneliness, except that this
time she had a secret, a dream, which would make her solitude
less bitter, and life would be easier.
“We’ll always have Paris.”
The voice didn’t belong to a tourist guide or to a taxi driver.
Her legs shook when she heard it.
“We’ll always have Paris?”
“It’s a quote from one of my favorite films. Would you like
to see the Eiffel Tower?”
Oh, yes, she would, she would love to. Ralf was holding a
bunch of roses, and his eyes were full of light, the light she
had seen on that first day, when he was painting her while the
cold wind outside had made her feel awkward to be sitting
there.
“How did you manage to get here before me?” she asked,
merely to disguise her amazement; she wasn’t in the least
interested in the answer, but she needed a breathing space.
“I saw you reading a magazine at Geneva airport. I could
have come over, but I’m such an incurable romantic that I
thought it would be best to catch the next shuttle to Paris,
wander about the airport here for three hours, consult the
arrivals screen over and over, buy some flowers, say the words
that Rick says to his beloved in Casablanca and see the look
of surprise on your face. And to be utterly sure that this was
what you wanted, that you were expecting me, that all the
determination and willpower in the world would not be
enough to prevent love from changing the rules of the game
from one moment to the next. It’s really easy being as
romantic as people in the movies, don’t you think?”
She had no idea whether it was easy or difficult, and she
didn’t honestly care, even though she had only just met this
man, even though they had made love for the first time only a
few hours before, even though she had only been introduced to
his friends the previous evening, even though he had been a
regular at the nightclub where she had worked, even though he
had been married twice. These were not exactly impeccable
credentials. On the other hand, she now had enough money to
buy a farm, she had her youth ahead of her, a great deal of
experience of life and a great independence of soul.
Nevertheless, as always happened when fate chose for her, she
thought, once again, that she would take the risk.
She kissed him, utterly indifferent now to what happens
after the words “The End” appear on the cinema screen.
But if, one day, someone should decide to tell her story, she
would ask them to begin it just as all the fairy tales begin:
Once upon a time…
AFTERWORD
Like everyone else—and in this case I have no qualms about
generalizing—it took me a long time to discover the sacred
nature of sex. My youth coincided with an age of enormous
freedom, great discoveries and many excesses, which was
followed by a period of conservatism and repression—the
price to be paid for extremes that brought with them some very
harsh consequences indeed.
In that decade of excess (the 1970s), the writer Irving
Wallace wrote a book about censorship in America, describing
the legal shenanigans involved in preventing the publication of
a book about sex: The Seven Minutes.
In Wallace’s novel, the contents of the book which
provokes the discussion about censorship are merely hinted at,
and the subject of sexuality itself is rarely mentioned. I
wondered what that banned book would be like; perhaps I
could have a go at writing it myself.
However, in his novel, Wallace makes many references to
this nonexistent book, and this necessarily limited the task I
had imagined, indeed, made it impossible. I was left with just
the title (although I felt Wallace had made a rather
conservative estimate of the time involved, and so decided to
increase it) and the idea of how important it was to treat
sexuality seriously—like many writers before me.
In 1997, after a lecture I gave in Mantua, Italy, I went back
to my hotel and found that someone had left a manuscript for
me in reception. Now, I never normally read unsolicited
manuscripts, but I did read that one—the true story of a
Brazilian prostitute, her marriages, her problems with the law,
and her various adventures. In 2000, when I was passing
through Zurich, I met that prostitute—known professionally as
Sonia—and said how much I had liked what I had read. I
suggested she send it to my Brazilian publisher, who, however,
decided, in the end, not to publish it. Sonia was living in Italy
at the time, but had travelled up on the train to meet me in
Zurich. She invited us—myself, a friend and a female
journalist from the newspaper Blick, who had just interviewed
me—to go to Langstrasse, the local red light district. I didn’t
know that Sonia had already forewarned her colleagues of our
visit, and to my surprise, I ended up signing several of my
books, translated into various languages.
At that point, I had already decided to write about sex, but I
still didn’t have a plot or a principal character; I was thinking
of something much more along the lines of the conventional
search for sacredness, but that visit to Langstrasse taught me
something: in order to write about the sacred nature of sex, it
was necessary to understand why it had been so profaned.
In conversation with a journalist from the Swiss magazine,
L’Illustrée, I described that spontaneous book-signing in
Langstrasse, and he wrote a long article about it. The result
was that, at a book-signing in Geneva, several prostitutes
turned up to have their copies of my books duly signed. I was
very struck by one of them in particular, and afterwards—with
my agent and friend, Mônica Antunes—we went for a coffee
that turned into supper that turned into other meetings in the
days that followed. Thus was born the connecting thread of
Eleven Minutes.
I would like to thank Anna von Planta, my Swiss publisher,
who supplied me with important facts about the legal situation
of prostitutes in her country. I would also like to thank the
following women in Zurich (using their noms de guerre):
Sonia, whom I met for the first time in Mantua (who knows,
maybe one day, someone will publish your book!), Martha,
Antenora and Isabella. And in Geneva (again using their noms
de guerre): Amy, Lucia, Andrei, Vanessa, Patrick, Thérèse and
Anna Christina.
Many thanks also to Antonella Zara, who allowed me to
use passages from her book, The Science of Passion, in certain
sections of Maria’s diary.
Finally, I must thank Maria (nom de guerre), who now lives
in Lausanne with her husband and her two lovely daughters
and who, during various meetings with myself and Mônica,
told us her story, on which this book is based.
Paulo Coelho
P.S. Insights, Interviews & More…
About the author
Meet Paulo Coelho
About the book
How I Came to Write Eleven Minutes
Q&A with Paulo Coelho
About the Author
Meet Paulo Coelho
PAULO WAS BORN IN RIO in August 1947, the son of
Pedro Queima Coelho de Souza, an engineer, and his wife,
Lygia, a homemaker. Early on, Paulo dreamed of an artistic
career, something frowned upon in his middle-class
household. In the austere surroundings of a strict Jesuit school,
Paulo discovered his true vocation: to be a writer. Paulo’s
parents, however, had different plans for him. When their
attempts to suppress his devotion to literature failed, they took
it as a sign of mental illness. When Paulo was seventeen, his
father had him committed twice to a mental institution, where
he endured sessions of electroconvulsive “therapy.” His
parents brought him back there once more after he became
involved with a theatre group and started to work as a
journalist.
Paulo was always a nonconformist and a seeker of the new.
When, in the excitement of 1968, the guerrilla and hippy
movements took hold in a Brazil ruled by a repressive military
regime, Paulo embraced progressive politics and joined the
peace and love generation. He sought spiritual experience,
traveling all over Latin America in the footsteps of Carlos
Castaneda. He worked in the theatre and dabbled in
journalism, launching an alternative magazine called 2001. He
began to collaborate with music producer Raul Seixas as a
lyricist, transforming the Brazilian rock scene. In 1973, Paulo
and Raul joined the Alternative Society, an organization that
defended the individual’s right to free expression, and began
publishing a series of comic strips calling for more freedom.
Members of the organization were detained and imprisoned.
Two days later, Paulo was kidnapped and tortured by a group
of paramilitaries.
This experience affected him profoundly. At the age of
twenty-six, Paulo decided that he had had enough of living on
the edge and wanted to be “normal.” He worked as an
executive in the music industry. He tried his hand at writing
but didn’t start seriously until after he had an encounter with a
stranger. The man first came to him in a vision, and two
months later Paulo met him at a café in Amsterdam. The
stranger suggested that Paulo should return to Catholicism and
study the benign side of magic. He also encouraged Paulo to
walk the Road to Santiago, the medieval pilgrim’s route.
In 1987, a year after completing that pilgrimage, Paulo
wrote The Pilgrimage. The book describes his experiences and
his discovery that the extraordinary occurs in the lives of
ordinary people. A year later, Paulo wrote a very different
book, The Alchemist. The first edition sold only nine hundred
copies and the publishing house decided not to reprint.
“Paulo would not surrender his dream.”
Paulo would not surrender his dream. He found another
publishing house, a bigger one. He wrote Brida (a work still
unpublished in English) that received a lot of attention in the
press and both The Alchemist and The Pilgrimage appeared on
bestseller lists. The Alchemist went on to sell more copies than
any other book in the literary history of Brazil.
Paulo’s story doesn’t end there. He has gone on to write
many other bestselling books that have touched the hearts of
people everywhere: By the River Piedra I Sat Down and Wept,
The Fifth Mountain, Veronika Decides to Die, The Devil and
Miss Prym, Warrior of the Light: A Manual, Eleven Minutes,
and the forthcoming The Zahir.
“The Alchemist went on to sell more copies than any other
book in the literary history of Brazil.”
ABOUT THE BOOK
How I Came to Write Eleven Minutes
DURING MY LIFETIME, I have experienced sex in many
different and contradictory ways. I was born into a
conservative age, when virginity was the defining
characteristic of any decent young woman. I witnessed the
emergence of the contraceptive pill and of antibiotics, both
indispensable for the sexual revolution that would follow. I
plunged enthusiastically into the hippy era, when we went to
the other extreme, with free love being practiced at rock
concerts. I now find myself in an age which is half
conservative, half liberal, an age haunted by a new disease
resistant to all antibiotics.
It is part of a writer’s role to reflect on his or her own life,
and writing a book about sexuality came to be a priority with
me. I tried various approaches, but all failed. It was only when
I met the prostitute who would provide the connecting thread
for this novel that I realized: in order to write about sublime
sex, I had to start with the fear that everything will go wrong.
Eleven Minutes does not set out to be a manual or a treatise
about a man and a woman confronted by the unknown world
of sexual relationships. It is an analysis of my own trajectory.
It took me a long time to learn that the coming together of two
bodies is more than a response to certain physical stimuli or to
the survival instinct. Sex is a manifestation of a spiritual
energy called love.
“It was only when I met the prostitute who would provide the
connecting thread for this novel that I realized: in order to
write about sublime sex, I had to start with the fear that
everything will go wrong.”
Sex means, above all, having the courage to experience
your own paradoxes, individuality, and willingness to
surrender. I wrote Eleven Minutes in order to find out if, at this
stage of life, at fifty-five, I had the courage to learn everything
that life has tried to teach me on the subject.
Q & A with Paulo Coelho
What is the central idea in Eleven Minutes?
We live in a world of standardized behavior, standardized
beauty, quality, intelligence, and efficiency. We believe there is
a standard for everything, and we believe, too, that if we stick
to that standard we’ll be safe. Because of this, we have created
a kind of “standardized sex,” which, in fact, consists of
nothing but a string of lies: vaginal orgasm, virility above all
else, and that it’s better to pretend than to disappoint your
partner. As a direct consequence of this, millions of people
have been left feeling frustrated, unhappy, and guilty. It also
lies at the root of all kinds of aberrant behavior, such as
pedophilia, incest, and rape. Why do we behave in this way
with something that is so important?
To what extent is the Maria in the book the real-life Maria?
How much of herself will she find in the story?
Maria is a real person, and is now married with two children.
However, the book isn’t simply her biography, because I’ve
also tried to make use of various other parallel elements. I
think she would recognize her story in the book as a whole,
but she wouldn’t necessarily have been confronted by the
same situations with which my character is confronted.
Has she read Eleven Minutes?
She read a first draft in October 2002. She felt that the book
was made up of a blend of different people, and I told her that
this had been precisely my intention. She asked who had
written the diary in the book, and said that she wished she
could have written it. She did ask me to change the age of the
principal male character, and I agreed—he’s older in real life
than he is in the book.
Did meeting foreign prostitutes working in Switzerland mean
that the book turned out very different from the way you had
originally envisaged it?
The idea of writing about sex is one that had been on my mind
for a long time, but I hadn’t found the right approach. Besides,
the gestation of every book is a mystery to me: the text itself
only comes into being once I’ve already written it in my
subconscious. Perhaps in my other attempts to write about sex,
I was too determined to deal only with its sacred side. The
reality is very different though, and I’m very pleased with the
way I’ve resolved the problem.
Hundreds of Brazilian women share Maria’s story: going from
the backlands of Brazil to the big city and then traveling
abroad to work as prostitutes. Is there a parallel between that
sad trajectory and the pilgrimage routes?
My book doesn’t set out to be a study of prostitution. I’ve tried
to avoid any kind of moralizing tone and in any way judging
the main character for the choice she makes. What really
interests me is how people relate to each other sexually. My
intention, as always, is to be straightforward without being
superficial.
“The idea of writing about sex is one that had been on my
mind for a long time, but I hadn’t found the right approach.”
What is the significance of the references to the Road to
Santiago in the book? Is there something particularly
significant about the fact that Maria meets the male character,
Ralf, on a stretch of that particular pilgrimage route, even
though she knows nothing about it?
There’s a realistic aspect to it—the Road to Santiago does, in
fact, pass through Geneva—and there’s a symbolic aspect too
—because, from that moment on, Maria’s body and soul begin
to become reintegrated, because of love.
Do you think the fact that your main character is a prostitute
will cause you problems in Muslim countries, like Iran, where
your books have had great success?
I don’t think about these things when I write. I think only
about being true to myself.
In the dedication, you say that some books make a reader
dream, while others bring him or her face-to-face with reality.
Could this be seen as a warning?
The dedication isn’t a warning, it’s a declaration of personal
principle. I have to write about topics that interest me, not just
things that others might want to read about. My readers are
intelligent people. If they felt there was a formula that was
repeated in all my books, they would stop reading them. I,
myself, am always surprised by what I write, and that, I think,
gives life to a book.
“I think only about being true to myself.”


